PMC_ID,Title,Authors,Keywords,References_Count,Abstract,Year,Publication_Type,URL
PMC4136787,Mice in Bion-M 1 Space Mission: Training and Selection,Alexander Andreev-Andrievskiy; Anfisa Popova; Richard Boyle; Jeffrey Alberts; Boris Shenkman; Olga Vinogradova; Oleg Dolgov; Konstantin Anokhin; Darya Tsvirkun; Pavel Soldatov; Tatyana Nemirovskaya; Eugeniy Ilyin; Vladimir Sychev,N/A,37,"After a 16-year hiatus, Russia has resumed its program of biomedical research in space, with the successful 30-day flight of the Bion-M 1 biosatellite (April 19–May 19, 2013). The principal species for biomedical research in this project was the mouse. This paper presents an overview of the scientific goals, the experimental design and the mouse training/selection program. The aim of mice experiments in the Bion-M 1 project was to elucidate cellular and molecular mechanisms, underlying the adaptation of key physiological systems to long-term exposure in microgravity. The studies with mice combined",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4136787/
PMC3630201,"Microgravity Induces Pelvic Bone Loss through Osteoclastic Activity, Osteocytic Osteolysis, and Osteoblastic Cell Cycle Inhibition by CDKN1a/p21",Elizabeth A. Blaber; Natalya Dvorochkin; Chialing Lee; Joshua S. Alwood; Rukhsana Yousuf; Piero Pianetta; Ruth K. Globus; Brendan P. Burns; Eduardo A. C. Almeida,N/A,74,"Bone is a dynamically remodeled tissue that requires gravity-mediated mechanical stimulation for maintenance of mineral content and structure. Homeostasis in bone occurs through a balance in the activities and signaling of osteoclasts, osteoblasts, and osteocytes, as well as proliferation and differentiation of their stem cell progenitors. Microgravity and unloading are known to cause osteoclast-mediated bone resorption; however, we hypothesize that osteocytic osteolysis, and cell cycle arrest during osteogenesis may also contribute to bone loss in space. To test this possibility, we exposed 16-week-old female C57BL/6J mice (n = 8) to microgravity for 15-days on the STS-131 space shuttle mission. Analysis of the pelvis by µCT shows decreases in bone volume fraction (BV/TV) of 6.29%, and bone thickness of 11.91%. TRAP-positive osteoclast-covered trabecular bone surfaces also increased in microgravity by 170% (p = 0.004), indicating osteoclastic bone degeneration. High-resolution X-ray nanoCT studies revealed signs of lacunar osteolysis, including increases in cross-sectional area (+17%, p = 0.022), perimeter (+14%, p = 0.008), and canalicular diameter (+6%, p = 0.037). Expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) 1, 3, and 10 in bone, as measured by RT-qPCR, was also up-regulated in microgravity (+12.94, +2.98 and +16.85 fold respectively, p<0.01), with MMP10 localized to osteocytes, and consistent with induction of osteocytic osteolysis. Furthermore, expression of CDKN1a/p21 in bone increased 3.31 fold (p<0.01), and was localized to osteoblasts, possibly inhibiting the cell cycle during tissue regeneration as well as conferring apoptosis resistance to these cells. Finally the apoptosis inducer Trp53 was down-regulated by −1.54 fold (p<0.01), possibly associated with the quiescent survival-promoting function of CDKN1a/p21. In conclusion, our findings identify the pelvic and femoral region of the mouse skeleton as an active site of rapid bone loss in microgravity, and indicate that this loss is not limited to osteoclastic degradation. Therefore, this study offers new evidence for microgravity-induced osteocytic osteolysis, and CDKN1a/p21-mediated osteogenic cell cycle arrest.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3630201/
PMC11988870,Microgravity and Cellular Biology: Insights into Cellular Responses and Implications for Human Health,Nelson Adolfo López Garzón; María Virginia Pinzón-Fernández; Jhan S. Saavedra T.; Humberto A. Nati-Castillo; Marlon Arias-Intriago; Camila Salazar-Santoliva; Juan S. Izquierdo-Condoy,microgravity; tissue effects; immune system; cardiomyocytes; cancer biology; human health,70,"Microgravity, defined by minimal gravitational forces, represents a unique environment that profoundly influences biological systems, including human cells. This review examines the effects of microgravity on biological processes and their implications for human health. Microgravity significantly impacts the immune system by disrupting key mechanisms, such as T cell activation, cytokine production, and macrophage differentiation, leading to increased susceptibility to infections. In cancer biology, it promotes the formation of spheroids in cancer stem cells and thyroid cancer cells, which closely mimic in vivo tumor dynamics, providing novel insights for oncology research. Additionally, microgravity enhances tissue regeneration by modulating critical pathways, including Hippo and PI3K-Akt, thereby improving stem cell differentiation into hematopoietic and cardiomyocyte lineages. At the organ level, microgravity induces notable changes in hepatic metabolism, endothelial function, and bone mechanotransduction, contributing to lipid dysregulation, vascular remodeling, and accelerated bone loss. Notably, cardiomyocytes derived from human pluripotent stem cells and cultured under microgravity exhibit enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis, improved calcium handling, and advanced structural maturation, including increased sarcomere length and nuclear eccentricity. These advancements enable the development of functional cardiomyocytes, presenting promising therapeutic opportunities for treating cardiac diseases, such as myocardial infarctions. These findings underscore the dual implications of microgravity for space medicine and terrestrial health. They highlight its potential to drive advances in regenerative therapies, oncology, and immunological interventions. Continued research into the biological effects of microgravity is essential for protecting astronaut health during prolonged space missions and fostering biomedical innovations with transformative applications on Earth.",2025,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11988870/
PMC7998608,Selective Proliferation of Highly Functional Adipose-Derived Stem Cells in Microgravity Culture with Stirred Microspheres,Takanobu Mashiko; Koji Kanayama; Natsumi Saito; Takako Shirado; Rintaro Asahi; Masanori Mori; Kotaro Yoshimura,adipose-derived stem cell; microgravity culture; polystyrene microsphere; collagen microsphere; multilineage-differentiating stress-enduring cell,48,"Therapeutic effects of adult stem-cell transplantations are limited by poor cell-retention in target organs, and a reduced potential for optimal cell differentiation compared to embryonic stem cells. However, contemporary studies have indicated heterogeneity within adult stem-cell pools, and a novel culturing technique may address these limitations by selecting those for cell proliferation which are highly functional. Here, we report the preservation of stemness in human adipose-derived stem cells (hASCs) by using microgravity conditions combined with microspheres in a stirred suspension. The cells were bound to microspheres (100−300 μm) and cultured using a wave-stirring shaker. One-week cultures using polystyrene and collagen microspheres increased the proportions of SSEA-3(+) hASCs 4.4- and 4.3-fold (2.7- and 2.9-fold increases in their numbers), respectively, compared to normal culture conditions. These cultured hASCs expressed higher levels of pluripotent markers (OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, MYC, and KLF), and had improved abilities for proliferation, colony formation, network formation, and multiple-mesenchymal differentiation. We believe that this novel culturing method may further enhance regenerative therapies using hASCs.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7998608/
PMC5587110,Microgravity validation of a novel system for RNA isolation and multiplex quantitative real time PCR analysis of gene expression on the International Space Station,Macarena Parra; Jimmy Jung; Travis D. Boone; Luan Tran; Elizabeth A. Blaber; Mark Brown; Matthew Chin; Tori Chinn; Jacob Cohen; Robert Doebler; Dzung Hoang; Elizabeth Hyde; Matthew Lera; Louie T. Luzod; Mark Mallinson; Oana Marcu; Youssef Mohamedaly; Antonio J. Ricco; Kathleen Rubins; Gregory D. Sgarlato; Rafael O. Talavera; Peter Tong; Eddie Uribe; Jeffrey Williams; Diana Wu; Rukhsana Yousuf; Charles S. Richey; Julie Schonfeld; Eduardo A. C. Almeida,N/A,38,"The International Space Station (ISS) National Laboratory is dedicated to studying the effects of space on life and physical systems, and to developing new science and technologies for space exploration. A key aspect of achieving these goals is to operate the ISS National Lab more like an Earth-based laboratory, conducting complex end-to-end experimentation, not limited to simple microgravity exposure. Towards that end NASA developed a novel suite of molecular biology laboratory tools, reagents, and methods, named WetLab-2, uniquely designed to operate in microgravity, and to process biological samples for real-time gene expression analysis on-orbit. This includes a novel fluidic RNA Sample Preparation Module and fluid transfer devices, all-in-one lyophilized PCR assays, centrifuge, and a real-time PCR thermal cycler. Here we describe the results from the WetLab-2 validation experiments conducted in microgravity during ISS increment 47/SPX-8. Specifically, quantitative PCR was performed on a concentration series of DNA calibration standards, and Reverse Transcriptase-quantitative PCR was conducted on RNA extracted and purified on-orbit from frozen",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5587110/
PMC8396460,Spaceflight Modulates the Expression of Key Oxidative Stress and Cell Cycle Related Genes in Heart,Akhilesh Kumar; Candice G. T. Tahimic; Eduardo A. C. Almeida; Ruth K. Globus,spaceflight; microgravity; heart; gene expression; oxidative stress; NADPH oxidase,76,Spaceflight causes cardiovascular changes due to microgravity-induced redistribution of body fluids and musculoskeletal unloading. Cardiac deconditioning and atrophy on Earth are associated with altered,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8396460/
PMC5666799,Dose- and Ion-Dependent Effects in the Oxidative Stress Response to Space-Like Radiation Exposure in the Skeletal System,Joshua S. Alwood; Luan H. Tran; Ann-Sofie Schreurs; Yasaman Shirazi-Fard; Akhilesh Kumar; Diane Hilton; Candice G. T. Tahimic; Ruth K. Globus,cancellous bone; osteoblast; ionizing radiation; spaceflight; oxidative stress,57,"Space radiation may pose a risk to skeletal health during subsequent aging. Irradiation acutely stimulates bone remodeling in mice, although the long-term influence of space radiation on bone-forming potential (osteoblastogenesis) and possible adaptive mechanisms are not well understood. We hypothesized that ionizing radiation impairs osteoblastogenesis in an ion-type specific manner, with low doses capable of modulating expression of redox-related genes. 16-weeks old, male, C57BL6/J mice were exposed to low linear-energy-transfer (LET) protons (150 MeV/n) or high-LET",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5666799/
PMC5460236,From the bench to exploration medicine: NASA life sciences translational research for human exploration and habitation missions,Joshua S. Alwood; April E. Ronca; Richard C. Mains; Mark J. Shelhamer; Jeffrey D. Smith; Thomas J. Goodwin,N/A,87,"NASA’s Space Biology and Human Research Program entities have recently spearheaded communications both internally and externally to coordinate the agency’s translational research efforts. In this paper, we strongly advocate for translational research at NASA, provide recent examples of NASA sponsored early-stage translational research, and discuss options for a path forward. Our overall objective is to help in stimulating a collaborative research across multiple disciplines and entities that, working together, will more effectively and more rapidly achieve NASA’s goals for human spaceflight.",2017,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5460236/
PMC6222041,High-precision method for cyclic loading of small-animal vertebrae to assess bone quality,Megan M. Pendleton; Saghi Sadoughi; Alfred Li; Grace D. O'Connell; Joshua S. Alwood; Tony M. Keaveny,Fatigue; Bone mechanics; Mouse; Vertebrae; Bone quality,36,"One potentially important bone quality characteristic is the response of bone to cyclic (repetitive) mechanical loading. In small animals, such as in rats and mice, cyclic loading experiments are particularly challenging to perform in a precise manner due to the small size of the bones and difficult-to-eliminate machine compliance. Addressing this issue, we developed a precise method for ex vivo cyclic compressive loading of isolated mouse vertebral bodies. The method has three key characteristics: 3D-printed support jigs for machining plano-parallel surfaces of the tiny vertebrae; pivotable loading platens to ensure uniform contact and loading of specimen surfaces; and specimen-specific micro-CT-based finite element analysis to measure stiffness to prescribe force levels that produce the same specified level of strain for all test specimens. To demonstrate utility, we measured fatigue life for three groups (",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6222041/
PMC6813909,Effects of ,Megan M. Pendleton; Shannon R. Emerzian; Jennifer Liu; Simon Y. Tang; Grace D. O’Connell; Joshua S. Alwood; Tony M. Keaveny,ionizing radiation; bone strength; fatigue; collagen; sterilization; bone-graft,0,"Bone can become brittle when exposed to ionizing radiation across a wide range of clinically relevant doses that span from radiotherapy (accumulative 50 Gy) to sterilization (~35,000 Gy). While irradiation-induced embrittlement has been attributed to changes in the collagen molecular structure, the relative role of collagen fragmentation versus non-enzymatic collagen crosslinking remains unclear. To better understand the effects of radiation on the bone material without cellular activity, we conducted an",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6813909/
PMC4095884,Absence of γ-sarcoglycan alters the response of p70S6 kinase to mechanical perturbation in murine skeletal muscle,Catherine Moorwood; Anastassios Philippou; Janelle Spinazzola; Benjamin Keyser; Edward J Macarak; Elisabeth R Barton,Sarcoglycan; Sarcoglycanopathies; Limb girdle muscular dystrophy; Mechanotransduction; Mechano-sensing; Load-sensing; p70S6K; S6K; p70S6 kinase; ERK1/2,67,"The dystrophin glycoprotein complex (DGC) is located at the sarcolemma of muscle fibers, providing structural integrity. Mutations in and loss of DGC proteins cause a spectrum of muscular dystrophies. When only the sarcoglycan subcomplex is absent, muscles display severe myofiber degeneration, but little susceptibility to contractile damage, suggesting that disease occurs not by structural deficits but through aberrant signaling, namely, loss of normal mechanotransduction signaling through the sarcoglycan complex. We extended our previous studies on mechanosensitive, γ-sarcoglycan-dependent ERK1/2 phosphorylation, to determine whether additional pathways are altered with the loss of γ-sarcoglycan. We examined mechanotransduction in the presence and absence of γ-sarcoglycan, using C2C12 myotubes, and primary cultures and isolated muscles from C57Bl/6 (C57) and γ-sarcoglycan-null (γ-SG C2C12 myotube stretch caused a robust increase in P-p70S6K, but decreased P-FAK and P-ERK2. Neither Akt nor ERK1 were responsive to passive stretch. Similar but non-significant trends were observed in C57 primary cultures in response to stretch, and γ-SG p70S6K is an important component of γ-sarcoglycan-dependent mechanotransduction in skeletal muscle. Our results suggest that loss of γ-sarcoglycan uncouples the response of p70S6K to stretch and implies that γ-sarcoglycan is important for inactivation of this pathway. Overall, we assert that altered load-sensing mechanisms exist in muscular dystrophies where the sarcoglycans are absent.",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4095884/
PMC3040128,5AtRabD2b and AtRabD2c have overlapping functions in pollen development and pollen tube growth,Jianling Peng; Hilal Ilarslan; Eve Syrkin Wurtele; Diane C Bassham,N/A,42,"Rab GTPases are important regulators of endomembrane trafficking, regulating exocytosis, endocytosis and membrane recycling. Many Rab-like proteins exist in plants, but only a subset have been functionally characterized. Here we report that AtRabD2b and AtRabD2c play important roles in pollen development, germination and tube elongation. These findings support a partially redundant role for AtRabD2b and AtRabD2c in vesicle trafficking during pollen tube growth that cannot be fulfilled by the remaining AtRabD family members.",2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3040128/
PMC3177255,TNO1 Is Involved in Salt Tolerance and Vacuolar Trafficking in Arabidopsis,Sang-Jin Kim; Diane C. Bassham,N/A,0,The Arabidopsis (,2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3177255/
PMC11500582,Identification of a novel Golgi-localized putative glycosyltransferase protein in ,Natalia Rzepecka; Yoko Ito; Kei Yura; Emi Ito; Tomohiro Uemura,glycosylation; Golgi apparatus; membrane trafficking,58,"SNAREs play an important role in the process of membrane trafficking. In the present research, we investigated subcellular localization of an uncharacterized",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11500582/
PMC5387210,"TNO1, a TGN-localized SNARE-interacting protein, modulates root skewing in ",Rahul Roy; Diane C. Bassham,Root movement; Cell file rotation; Tethering factor; Microtubules,73,"The movement of plant roots within the soil is key to their ability to interact with the environment and maximize anchorage and nutrient acquisition. Directional growth of roots occurs by a combination of sensing external cues, hormonal signaling and cytoskeletal changes in the root cells. Roots growing on slanted, impenetrable growth medium display a characteristic waving and skewing, and mutants with deviations in these phenotypes assist in identifying genes required for root movement. Our study identifies a role for a We found that We conclude that TNO1 modulates root skewing in a mechanism that is dependent on microtubules but is not linked to disruption of the orientation of microtubule arrays. In addition, TNO1 is required for maintenance of cell morphology in mature regions of roots and the base of hypocotyls. The TGN-localized SNARE machinery might therefore be important for appropriate epidermal cell file rotation and cell expansion during root growth.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5387210/
PMC4642138,Gravitropism and Lateral Root Emergence are Dependent on the ,Rahul Roy; Diane C. Bassham,auxin; lateral root; gravitropism; tethering factor,79,The,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4642138/
PMC5387210,"TNO1, a TGN-localized SNARE-interacting protein, modulates root skewing in ",Rahul Roy; Diane C. Bassham,Root movement; Cell file rotation; Tethering factor; Microtubules,73,"The movement of plant roots within the soil is key to their ability to interact with the environment and maximize anchorage and nutrient acquisition. Directional growth of roots occurs by a combination of sensing external cues, hormonal signaling and cytoskeletal changes in the root cells. Roots growing on slanted, impenetrable growth medium display a characteristic waving and skewing, and mutants with deviations in these phenotypes assist in identifying genes required for root movement. Our study identifies a role for a We found that We conclude that TNO1 modulates root skewing in a mechanism that is dependent on microtubules but is not linked to disruption of the orientation of microtubule arrays. In addition, TNO1 is required for maintenance of cell morphology in mature regions of roots and the base of hypocotyls. The TGN-localized SNARE machinery might therefore be important for appropriate epidermal cell file rotation and cell expansion during root growth.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5387210/
PMC2915878,The ,Martin P. Kracklauer; Heather M. Wiora; William J. Deery; Xin Chen; Benjamin Bolival; Dwight Romanowicz; Rebecca A. Simonette; Margaret T. Fuller; Janice A. Fischer; Kathleen M. Beckingham,KASH protein; SUN protein; Centrosome; Centriole; Coiled-coil proteins; Sperm basal body; Spermatogenesis,0,"Maintaining the proximity of centrosomes to nuclei is important in several cellular contexts, and LINC complexes formed by SUN and KASH proteins are crucial in this process. Here, we characterize the presumed",2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2915878/
PMC3901686,Toll Mediated Infection Response Is Altered by Gravity and Spaceflight in ,Katherine Taylor; Kurt Kleinhesselink; Michael D. George; Rachel Morgan; Tangi Smallwood; Ann S. Hammonds; Patrick M. Fuller; Perot Saelao; Jeff Alley; Allen G. Gibbs; Deborah K. Hoshizaki; Laurence von Kalm; Charles A. Fuller; Kathleen M. Beckingham; Deborah A. Kimbrell,N/A,69,"Space travel presents unlimited opportunities for exploration and discovery, but requires better understanding of the biological consequences of long-term exposure to spaceflight. Immune function in particular is relevant for space travel. Human immune responses are weakened in space, with increased vulnerability to opportunistic infections and immune-related conditions. In addition, microorganisms can become more virulent in space, causing further challenges to health. To understand these issues better and to contribute to design of effective countermeasures, we used the Drosophila model of innate immunity to study immune responses in both hypergravity and spaceflight. Focusing on infections mediated through the conserved Toll and Imd signaling pathways, we found that hypergravity improves resistance to Toll-mediated fungal infections except in a known gravitaxis mutant of the",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3901686/
PMC6985101,Author Correction: Multi-omics analysis of multiple missions to space reveal a theme of lipid dysregulation in mouse liver,Afshin Beheshti; Kaushik Chakravarty; Homer Fogle; Hossein Fazelinia; Willian A. da Silveira; Valery Boyko; San-Huei Lai Polo; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; Gary Hardiman; Deanne Taylor; Jonathan M. Galazka; Sylvain V. Costes,N/A,0,N/A,2020,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6985101/
PMC6387434,GeneLab Database Analyses Suggest Long-Term Impact of Space Radiation on the Cardiovascular System by the Activation of ,Afshin Beheshti; J. Tyson McDonald; Jack Miller; Peter Grabham; Sylvain V. Costes,space radiation; GeneLab; cardiovascular; HUVECs; ROS; reactive oxygen species; cardiomyocytes; protons; iron; HZE irradiation,84,"Space radiation has recently been considered a risk factor for astronauts’ cardiac health. As an example, for the case of how to query and identify datasets within NASA’s GeneLab database and demonstrate the database utility, we used an unbiased systems biology method for identifying key genes/drivers for the contribution of space radiation on the cardiovascular system. This knowledge can contribute to designing appropriate experiments targeting these specific pathways. Microarray data from cardiomyocytes of male C57BL/6 mice followed-up for 28 days after exposure to 900 mGy of 1 GeV proton or 150 mGy of 1 GeV/n",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6387434/
PMC6371294,FAIRness and Usability for Open-access Omics Data Systems,Daniel C. Berrios; Afshin Beheshti; Sylvain V. Costes,N/A,0,"Omics data sharing is crucial to the biological research community, and the last decade or two has seen a huge rise in collaborative analysis systems, databases, and knowledge bases for omics and other systems biology data. We assessed the “FAIRness” of NASA’s GeneLab Data Systems (GLDS) along with four similar kinds of systems in the research omics data domain, using 14 FAIRness metrics. The range of overall FAIRness scores was 6-12 (out of 14), average 10.1, and standard deviation 2.4. The range of Pass ratings for the metrics was 29-79%, Partial Pass 0-21%, and Fail 7-50%. The systems we evaluated performed the best in the areas of data findability and accessibility, and worst in the area of data interoperability. Reusability of metadata, in particular, was frequently not well supported. We relate our experiences implementing semantic integration of omics data from some of the assessed systems for federated querying and retrieval functions, given their shortcomings in data interoperability. Finally, we propose two new principles that Big Data system developers, in particular, should consider for maximizing data accessibility.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6371294/
PMC7072278,NASA GeneLab Platform Utilized for Biological Response to Space Radiation in Animal Models,J. Tyson McDonald; Robert Stainforth; Jack Miller; Thomas Cahill; Willian A. da Silveira; Komal S. Rathi; Gary Hardiman; Deanne Taylor; Sylvain V. Costes; Vinita Chauhan; Robert Meller; Afshin Beheshti,GeneLab; NASA; space radiation; HZE; galactic cosmic rays; transcriptomics; dosimetry; radiation,99,N/A,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7072278/
PMC8441986,Circulating miRNA Spaceflight Signature Reveals Targets for Countermeasure Development,Sherina Malkani; Christopher R. Chin; Egle Cekanaviciute; Marie Mortreux; Hazeem Okinula; Marcel Tarbier; Ann-Sofie Schreurs; Yasaman Shirazi-Fard; Candice G.T. Tahimic; Deyra N. Rodriguez; Brittany S. Sexton; Daniel Butler; Akanksha Verma; Daniela Bezdan; Ceyda Durmaz; Matthew MacKay; Ari Melnick; Cem Meydan; Sheng Li; Francine Garrett-Bakelman; Bastian Fromm; Ebrahim Afshinnekoo; Brad W. Langhorst; Eileen T. Dimalanta; Margareth Cheng-Campbell; Elizabeth Blaber; Jonathan C. Schisler; Charles Vanderburg; Marc R. Friedländer; J. Tyson McDonald; Sylvain V. Costes; Seward Rutkove; Peter Grabham; Christopher E. Mason; Afshin Beheshti,N/A,83,"We have identified and validated a spaceflight-associated microRNA (miRNA) signature that is shared by rodents and humans in response to simulated, short-duration and long-duration spaceflight. Previous studies have identified miRNAs that regulate rodent responses to spaceflight in low-Earth orbit, and we have confirmed the expression of these proposed spaceflight-associated miRNAs in rodents reacting to simulated spaceflight conditions. Moreover, astronaut samples from the NASA Twins Study confirmed these expression signatures in miRNA sequencing, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), and single-cell assay for transposase accessible chromatin (scATAC-seq) data. Additionally, a subset of these miRNAs (miR-125, miR-16, and let-7a) was found to regulate vascular damage caused by simulated deep space radiation. To demonstrate the physiological relevance of key spaceflight-associated miRNAs, we utilized antagomirs to inhibit their expression and successfully rescue simulated deep-space-radiation-mediated damage in human 3D vascular constructs.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8441986/
PMC9400218,Machine learning algorithm to characterize antimicrobial resistance associated with the International Space Station surface microbiome,Pedro Madrigal; Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Elena Gaudioso; Félix Hernández-del-Olmo; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Afshin Beheshti,ISS; Metagenomics; Antibiotic resistance; Machine learning; Space Omics; Microbiome; Built-environment; Microbial Tracking-1; NGS,62,"Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has a detrimental impact on human health on Earth and it is equally concerning in other environments such as space habitat due to microgravity, radiation and confinement, especially for long-distance space travel. The International Space Station (ISS) is ideal for investigating microbial diversity and virulence associated with spaceflight. The shotgun metagenomics data of the ISS generated during the Microbial Tracking–1 (MT-1) project and resulting metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) across three flights in eight different locations during 12 months were used in this study. The objective of this study was to identify the AMR genes associated with whole genomes of 226 cultivable strains, 21 shotgun metagenome sequences, and 24 MAGs retrieved from the ISS environmental samples that were treated with propidium monoazide (PMA; viable microbes). We have analyzed the data using a deep learning model, allowing us to go beyond traditional cut-offs based only on high DNA sequence similarity and extending the catalog of AMR genes. Our results in PMA treated samples revealed AMR dominance in the last flight for Overall, our computational predictions and validation analyses demonstrate the advantages of machine learning to uncover concealed AMR determinants in metagenomics datasets, expanding the understanding of the ISS environmental microbiomes and their pathogenic potential in humans. Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01332-w.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9400218/
PMC9267413,Extraterrestrial Gynecology: Could Spaceflight Increase the Risk of Developing Cancer in Female Astronauts? An Updated Review,Rosa Drago-Ferrante; Riccardo Di Fiore; Fathi Karouia; Yashwanth Subbannayya; Saswati Das; Begum Aydogan Mathyk; Shehbeel Arif; Ana Paula Guevara-Cerdán; Allen Seylani; Aman Singh Galsinh; Weronika Kukulska; Joseph Borg; Sherif Suleiman; David Marshall Porterfield; Andrea Camera; Lane K. Christenson; April Elizabeth Ronca; Jonathan G. Steller; Afshin Beheshti; Jean Calleja-Agius,space exploration; microgravity; space radiation; astronaut health; female reproductive system; gynecological cancers,186,"Outer space is an extremely hostile environment for human life, with ionizing radiation from galactic cosmic rays and microgravity posing the most significant hazards to the health of astronauts. Spaceflight has also been shown to have an impact on established cancer hallmarks, possibly increasing carcinogenic risk. Terrestrially, women have a higher incidence of radiation-induced cancers, largely driven by lung, thyroid, breast, and ovarian cancers, and therefore, historically, they have been permitted to spend significantly less time in space than men. In the present review, we focus on the effects of microgravity and radiation on the female reproductive system, particularly gynecological cancer. The aim is to provide a summary of the research that has been carried out related to the risk of gynecological cancer, highlighting what further studies are needed to pave the way for safer exploration class missions, as well as postflight screening and management of women astronauts following long-duration spaceflight.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9267413/
PMC9576569,Muscle atrophy phenotype gene expression during spaceflight is linked to a metabolic crosstalk in both the liver and the muscle in mice,Geraldine Vitry; Rebecca Finch; Gavin Mcstay; Afshin Behesti; Sébastien Déjean; Tricia Larose; Virginia Wotring; Willian Abraham da Silveira,Space medicine; Omics; Space sciences; Astronautics,62,"Human expansion in space is hampered by the physiological risks of spaceflight. The muscle and the liver are among the most affected tissues during spaceflight and their relationships in response to space exposure have never been studied. We compared the transcriptome response of liver and quadriceps from mice on NASA RR1 mission, after 37 days of exposure to spaceflight using GSEA, ORA, and sparse partial least square-differential analysis. We found that lipid metabolism is the most affected biological process between the two organs. A specific gene cluster expression pattern in the liver strongly correlated with glucose sparing and an energy-saving response affecting high energy demand process gene expression such as DNA repair, autophagy, and translation in the muscle. Our results show that impaired lipid metabolism gene expression in the liver and muscle atrophy gene expression are two paired events during spaceflight, for which dietary changes represent a possible countermeasure.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9576569/
PMC10789781,Chromosomal positioning and epigenetic architecture influence DNA methylation patterns triggered by galactic cosmic radiation,Adrian Perdyan; Marcin Jąkalski; Monika Horbacz; Afshin Beheshti; Jakub Mieczkowski,Computational biology and bioinformatics; Molecular biology; Space physics,59,"Despite surging interest in space travel in recent decades, the impacts of prolonged, elevated exposure to galactic cosmic radiation (GCR) on human health remain poorly understood. This form of ionizing radiation causes significant changes to biological systems including damage to DNA structure by altering epigenetic phenotype with emphasis on DNA methylation. Building on previous work by Kennedy et al. (Sci Rep 8(1): 6709. 10.1038/S41598-018-24755-8), we evaluated spatial DNA methylation patterns triggered by high-LET (",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10789781/
PMC10772081,"A comprehensive SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 review, Part 2: host extracellular to systemic effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection",S. Anand Narayanan; David A. Jamison; Joseph W. Guarnieri; Victoria Zaksas; Michael Topper; Andrew P. Koutnik; Jiwoon Park; Kevin B. Clark; Francisco J. Enguita; Ana Lúcia Leitão; Saswati Das; Pedro M. Moraes-Vieira; Diego Galeano; Christopher E. Mason; Nídia S. Trovão; Robert E. Schwartz; Jonathan C. Schisler; Jordana G. A. Coelho-dos-Reis; Eve Syrkin Wurtele; Afshin Beheshti,Viral infection; Diagnostic markers; Pathology; Chronic inflammation,82,"COVID-19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2, has caused significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. The betacoronavirus continues to evolve with global health implications as we race to learn more to curb its transmission, evolution, and sequelae. The focus of this review, the second of a three-part series, is on the biological effects of the SARS-CoV-2 virus on post-acute disease in the context of tissue and organ adaptations and damage. We highlight the current knowledge and describe how virological, animal, and clinical studies have shed light on the mechanisms driving the varied clinical diagnoses and observations of COVID-19 patients. Moreover, we describe how investigations into SARS-CoV-2 effects have informed the understanding of viral pathogenesis and provide innovative pathways for future research on the mechanisms of viral diseases.",2023,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10772081/
PMC11166946,Aging and putative frailty biomarkers are altered by spaceflight,Andrea Camera; Marshall Tabetah; Veronica Castañeda; JangKeun Kim; Aman Singh Galsinh; Alissen Haro-Vinueza; Ivonne Salinas; Allen Seylani; Shehbeel Arif; Saswati Das; Marcelo A. Mori; Anthony Carano; Lorraine Christine de Oliveira; Masafumi Muratani; Richard Barker; Victoria Zaksas; Chirag Goel; Eleni Dimokidis; Deanne M. Taylor; Jisu Jeong; Eliah Overbey; Cem Meydan; D. Marshall Porterfield; Juan Esteban Díaz; Andrés Caicedo; Jonathan C. Schisler; Evagelia C. Laiakis; Christopher E. Mason; Man S. Kim; Fathi Karouia; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Afshin Beheshti,Genetics; Medical research,98,"Human space exploration poses inherent risks to astronauts’ health, leading to molecular changes that can significantly impact their well-being. These alterations encompass genomic instability, mitochondrial dysfunction, increased inflammation, homeostatic dysregulation, and various epigenomic changes. Remarkably, these changes bear similarities to those observed during the aging process on Earth. However, our understanding of the connection between these molecular shifts and disease development in space remains limited. Frailty syndrome, a clinical syndrome associated with biological aging, has not been comprehensively investigated during spaceflight. To bridge this knowledge gap, we leveraged murine data obtained from NASA’s GeneLab, along with astronaut data gathered from the JAXA and Inspiration4 missions. Our objective was to assess the presence of biological markers and pathways related to frailty, aging, and sarcopenia within the spaceflight context. Through our analysis, we identified notable changes in gene expression patterns that may be indicative of the development of a frailty-like condition during space missions. These findings suggest that the parallels between spaceflight and the aging process may extend to encompass frailty as well. Consequently, further investigations exploring the utility of a frailty index in monitoring astronaut health appear to be warranted.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166946/
PMC11166944,Space radiation damage rescued by inhibition of key spaceflight associated miRNAs,J. Tyson McDonald; JangKeun Kim; Lily Farmerie; Meghan L. Johnson; Nidia S. Trovao; Shehbeel Arif; Keith Siew; Sergey Tsoy; Yaron Bram; Jiwoon Park; Eliah Overbey; Krista Ryon; Jeffrey Haltom; Urminder Singh; Francisco J. Enguita; Victoria Zaksas; Joseph W. Guarnieri; Michael Topper; Douglas C. Wallace; Cem Meydan; Stephen Baylin; Robert Meller; Masafumi Muratani; D. Marshall Porterfield; Brett Kaufman; Marcelo A. Mori; Stephen B. Walsh; Dominique Sigaudo-Roussel; Saida Mebarek; Massimo Bottini; Christophe A. Marquette; Eve Syrkin Wurtele; Robert E. Schwartz; Diego Galeano; Christopher E. Mason; Peter Grabham; Afshin Beheshti,Systems analysis; Predictive markers; Cardiology,116,"Our previous research revealed a key microRNA signature that is associated with spaceflight that can be used as a biomarker and to develop countermeasure treatments to mitigate the damage caused by space radiation. Here, we expand on this work to determine the biological factors rescued by the countermeasure treatment. We performed RNA-sequencing and transcriptomic analysis on 3D microvessel cell cultures exposed to simulated deep space radiation (0.5 Gy of Galactic Cosmic Radiation) with and without the antagonists to three microRNAs: miR-16-5p, miR-125b-5p, and let-7a-5p (",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166944/
PMC11166968,Ethical considerations for the age of non-governmental space exploration,Allen Seylani; Aman Singh Galsinh; Alexia Tasoula; Anu R I; Andrea Camera; Jean Calleja-Agius; Joseph Borg; Chirag Goel; JangKeun Kim; Kevin B. Clark; Saswati Das; Shehbeel Arif; Michael Boerrigter; Caroline Coffey; Nathaniel Szewczyk; Christopher E. Mason; Maria Manoli; Fathi Karouia; Hansjörg Schwertz; Afshin Beheshti; Dana Tulodziecki,Ethics; Medical research,89,"Mounting ambitions and capabilities for public and private, non-government sector crewed space exploration bring with them an increasingly diverse set of space travelers, raising new and nontrivial ethical, legal, and medical policy and practice concerns which are still relatively underexplored. In this piece, we lay out several pressing issues related to ethical considerations for selecting space travelers and conducting human subject research on them, especially in the context of non-governmental and commercial/private space operations.",2024,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166968/
PMC7000411,Spaceflight and simulated microgravity conditions increase virulence of ,Rachel Gilbert; Medaya Torres; Rachel Clemens; Shannon Hateley; Ravikumar Hosamani; William Wade; Sharmila Bhattacharya,Infection; Innate immunity; Microbiology,69,"While it has been shown that astronauts suffer immune disorders after spaceflight, the underlying causes are still poorly understood and there are many variables to consider when investigating the immune system in a complex environment. Additionally, there is growing evidence that suggests that not only is the immune system being altered, but the pathogens that infect the host are significantly influenced by spaceflight and ground-based spaceflight conditions. In this study, we demonstrate that",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7000411/
PMC7787258,Prolonged Exposure to Microgravity Reduces Cardiac Contractility and Initiates Remodeling in ,Stanley Walls; Soda Diop; Ryan Birse; Lisa Elmen; Zhuohui Gan; Sreehari Kalvakuri; Santiago Pineda; Curran Reddy; Erika Taylor; Bosco Trinh; Georg Vogler; Rachel Zarndt; Andrew McCulloch; Peter Lee; Sharmila Bhattacharya; Rolf Bodmer; Karen Ocorr,N/A,38,"Understanding the effects of microgravity on human organs is crucial to exploration of low-earth orbit, the moon, and beyond.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7787258/
PMC8716943,Bundling up the Role of the Actin Cytoskeleton in Primary Root Growth,Judith García-González; Kasper van Gelderen,actin; root growth; cell elongation; auxin; gravitropism; actin-binding protein; light,151,"Primary root growth is required by the plant to anchor in the soil and reach out for nutrients and water, while dealing with obstacles. Efficient root elongation and bending depends upon the coordinated action of environmental sensing, signal transduction, and growth responses. The actin cytoskeleton is a highly plastic network that constitutes a point of integration for environmental stimuli and hormonal pathways. In this review, we present a detailed compilation highlighting the importance of the actin cytoskeleton during primary root growth and we describe how actin-binding proteins, plant hormones, and actin-disrupting drugs affect root growth and root actin. We also discuss the feedback loop between actin and root responses to light and gravity. Actin affects cell division and elongation through the control of its own organization. We remark upon the importance of longitudinally oriented actin bundles as a hallmark of cell elongation as well as the role of the actin cytoskeleton in protein trafficking and vacuolar reshaping during this process. The actin network is shaped by a plethora of actin-binding proteins; however, there is still a large gap in connecting the molecular function of these proteins with their developmental effects. Here, we summarize their function and known effects on primary root growth with a focus on their high level of specialization. Light and gravity are key factors that help us understand root growth directionality. The response of the root to gravity relies on hormonal, particularly auxin, homeostasis, and the actin cytoskeleton. Actin is necessary for the perception of the gravity stimulus via the repositioning of sedimenting statoliths, but it is also involved in mediating the growth response via the trafficking of auxin transporters and cell elongation. Furthermore, auxin and auxin analogs can affect the composition of the actin network, indicating a potential feedback loop. Light, in its turn, affects actin organization and hence, root growth, although its precise role remains largely unknown. Recently, fundamental studies with the latest techniques have given us more in-depth knowledge of the role and organization of actin in the coordination of root growth; however, there remains a lot to discover, especially in how actin organization helps cell shaping, and therefore root growth.",2021,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8716943/
PMC4826010,HLB1 Is a Tetratricopeptide Repeat Domain-Containing Protein That Operates at the Intersection of the Exocytic and Endocytic Pathways at the TGN/EE in Arabidopsis,J. Alan Sparks; Taegun Kwon; Luciana Renna; Fuqi Liao; Federica Brandizzi; Elison B. Blancaflor,N/A,0,A forward-genetic screen for Arabidopsis mutants hypersensitive to latrunculin B identifies HLB1 as a plant-specific protein that functions in post-Golgi traffic.,2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4826010/
PMC6048781,ERULUS Is a Plasma Membrane-Localized Receptor-Like Kinase That Specifies Root Hair Growth by Maintaining Tip-Focused Cytoplasmic Calcium Oscillations,Taegun Kwon; J. Alan Sparks; Fuqi Liao; Elison B. Blancaflor,N/A,0,N/A,2018,letter,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6048781/
PMC7010715,Brassinosteroids Inhibit Autotropic Root Straightening by Modifying Filamentous-Actin Organization and Dynamics,Louise de Bang; Ana Paez-Garcia; Ashley E. Cannon; Sabrina Chin; Jaydeep Kolape; Fuqi Liao; J. Alan Sparks; Qingzhen Jiang; Elison B. Blancaflor,autotropism; actin; brassinosteroids; clinostat; cytoskeleton; gravitropism; root development,66,"When positioned horizontally, roots grow down toward the direction of gravity. This phenomenon, called gravitropism, is influenced by most of the major plant hormones including brassinosteroids. Epi-brassinolide (eBL) was previously shown to enhance root gravitropism, a phenomenon similar to the response of roots exposed to the actin inhibitor, latrunculin B (LatB). This led us to hypothesize that eBL might enhance root gravitropism through its effects on filamentous-actin (F-actin). This hypothesis was tested by comparing gravitropic responses of maize (",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7010715/
PMC7503278,Cell Type-Specific Imaging of Calcium Signaling in ,William Krogman; J. Alan Sparks; Elison B. Blancaflor,GCaMP3; Arabidopsis; cell type specificity; calcium response; [Ca,36,Cytoplasmic calcium ([Ca,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7503278/
PMC8364238,Spatial and temporal localization of SPIRRIG and WAVE/SCAR reveal roles for these proteins in actin-mediated root hair development,Sabrina Chin; Taegun Kwon; Bibi Rafeiza Khan; J. Alan Sparks; Eileen L. Mallery; Daniel B. Szymanski; Elison B. Blancaflor,N/A,94,SPIRRIG and SCAR/WAVE are molecular determinants of actin-mediated root hair development in Arabidopsis.,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8364238/
PMC11579474,Impact of microgravity and lunar gravity on murine skeletal and immune systems during space travel,Yui Okamura; Kei Gochi; Tatsuya Ishikawa; Takuto Hayashi; Sayaka Fuseya; Riku Suzuki; Maho Kanai; Yuri Inoue; Yuka Murakami; Shunya Sadaki; Hyojung Jeon; Mio Hayama; Hiroto Ishii; Yuki Tsunakawa; Hiroki Ochi; Shingo Sato; Michito Hamada; Chikara Abe; Hironobu Morita; Risa Okada; Dai Shiba; Masafumi Muratani; Masahiro Shinohara; Taishin Akiyama; Takashi Kudo; Satoru Takahashi,Spaceflight; Microgravity; Thymus; Spleen; Bone; Gene expression; Transcriptomics; Immunology; Bone,39,"Long-duration spaceflight creates a variety of stresses due to the unique environment, which can lead to compromised functioning of the skeletal and immune systems. However, the mechanisms by which organisms respond to this stress remain unclear. The present study aimed to investigate the impact of three different gravitational loadings (microgravity, 1/6",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11579474/
PMC2998437,"
",Michael R. Dorwart; Robin Wray; Chad A. Brautigam; Youxing Jiang; Paul Blount,N/A,31,Detergent-induced rearrangements of membrane-protein subunits explain why two MscL channel stoichiometries have been resolved by X-ray crystallography - but,2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2998437/
PMC3005423,Manipulating the permeation of charged compounds through the MscL nanovalve,Li-Min Yang; Paul Blount,osmoregulation; drug-release device; ionic preference; ionic selectivity,0,"MscL is a bacterial mechanosensor that serves as a biological emergency release valve, releasing cytoplasmic solutes to the environment on osmotic downshock. Previous studies have recognized that this channel has properties that make it ideal for use as a triggered nanovalve for vesicular-based targeted drug-release devices. One can even change the modality of the sensor. Briefly, the introduction of charges into the MscL pore lumen gates the channel in the absence of membrane tension; thus, by inserting compounds that acquire a charge on exposure to an alternative stimulus, such as light or pH, into the pore of the channel, controllable nanoswitches that detect these alternative modalities have been engineered. However, a charge in the pore lumen could not only encourage actuation of the nanopore but also have a significant influence on the permeation of large charged compounds, which would thus have important implications for the efficiency of drug-release devices. In this study, we used",2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3005423/
PMC3190158,The oligomeric state of the truncated mechanosensitive channel of large conductance shows no variance ,Irene Iscla; Robin Wray; Paul Blount,mechanosensitive channel; oligomerization; detergent solubilization; stoichiometry; disulfide trapping,0,The mechanosensitive channel of large conductance (MscL) from,2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3190158/
PMC3289768,Three Routes to Modulate the Pore Size of the MscL Channel/Nanovalve,Li-Min Yang; Robin Wray; Juandell Parker; Danyell Wilson; Randolph S. Duran; Paul Blount,Osmoregulation; Conductance; Nanopore; Biosensor; Drug-release device,0,"MscL is a bacterial mechanosensitive channel that protects cells from lysis upon acute decrease in external osmotic environment. It is one of the best characterized mechanosensors known, thus serving as a paradigm of how such molecules sense and respond to stimuli. In addition, the fact that it can be genetically modified, expressed, isolated, and manipulated has led to its proposed use as a triggered nanovalve for various functions including sensors within microelectronic array chips, as well as vesicular-based targeted drug release. X-ray crystallography reveals a homo-pentameric complex with each subunit containing two transmembrane α-helices (TM1 and TM2) and a single carboxyl terminal α-helix arranging within the complex to form a five-fold cytoplasmic bundle (CB), whose function and stability remain unclear. In this study, we show three routes that throttle the open channel conductance. When the linker between the TM2 and CB domain is shortened by deletions or constrained by either cross linking or heavy metal coordination, the conductance of the channel is reduced; in later two cases, even reversibly. While having implications for the stability of the CB, these data also provide routes for engineering MscL sensors that are more versatile for potential nanotech devices.",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3289768/
PMC3508904,The dynamics of protein-protein interactions between domains of MscL at the cytoplasmic-lipid interface,Irene Iscla; Robin Wray; Paul Blount,mechanosensitive channel; MscL; disulfide trapping; protein-protein interactions; osmoregulation,0,"The bacterial mechanosensitive channel of large conductance, MscL, is one of the best characterized mechanosensitive channels serving as a paradigm for how proteins can sense and transduce mechanical forces. The physiological role of MscL is that of an emergency release valve that opens a large pore upon a sudden drop in the osmolarity of the environment. A crystal structure of a closed state of MscL shows it as a homopentamer, with each subunit consisting of two transmembrane domains (TM). There is consensus that the TM helices move in an iris like manner tilting in the plane of the membrane while gating. An N-terminal amphipathic helix that lies along the cytoplasmic membrane (S1), and the portion of TM2 near the cytoplasmic interface (TM2",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3508904/
PMC3430326,The MscS and MscL Families of Mechanosensitive Channels Act as Microbial Emergency Release Valves,Ian R. Booth; Paul Blount,N/A,0,"Single-celled organisms must survive exposure to environmental extremes. Perhaps one of the most variable and potentially life-threatening changes that can occur is that of a rapid and acute decrease in external osmolarity. This easily translates into several atmospheres of additional pressure that can build up within the cell. Without a protective mechanism against such pressures, the cell will lyse. Hence, most microbes appear to possess members of one or both families of bacterial mechanosensitive channels, MscS and MscL, which can act as biological emergency release valves that allow cytoplasmic solutes to be jettisoned rapidly from the cell. While this is undoubtedly a function of these proteins, the discovery of the presence of MscS homologues in plant organelles and MscL in fungus and mycoplasma genomes may complicate this simplistic interpretation of the physiology underlying these proteins. Here we compare and contrast these two mechanosensitive channel families, discuss their potential physiological roles, and review some of the most relevant data that underlie the current models for their structure and function.",2012,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3430326/
PMC3593973,Chimeras reveal a single lipid-interface residue that controls MscL channel kinetics as well as mechanosensitivity,Li-Min Yang; Dalian Zhong; Paul Blount,mechanosensitive channel; channel kinetics; osmoregulation; protein-lipid interactions,0,"MscL, the highly conserved bacterial mechanosensitive channel of large conductance, functionally serves as an osmotic “emergency release valve”, is among the best studied mechanosensors and a paradigm of how a channel senses and responds to membrane tension. While all homologues tested thus far encode channel activity, many show functional differences. Here we tested",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3593973/
PMC5018776,"Correction for Boothby et al., Evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer from the draft genome of a tardigrade",N/A,N/A,0,N/A,2016,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5018776/
PMC4896697,Reply to Bemm et al. and Arakawa: Identifying foreign genes in independent ,Thomas C. Boothby; Bob Goldstein,N/A,0,N/A,2016,reply,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4896697/
PMC11127935,Tardigrade secretory proteins protect biological structures from desiccation,Samuel Lim; Charles B. Reilly; Zeina Barghouti; Benedetto Marelli; Jeffrey C. Way; Pamela A. Silver,Proteins; Synthetic biology,30,"Tardigrades, microscopic animals that survive a broad range of environmental stresses, express a unique set of proteins termed tardigrade-specific intrinsically disordered proteins (TDPs). TDPs are often expressed at high levels in tardigrades upon desiccation, and appear to mediate stress adaptation. Here, we focus on the proteins belonging to the secreted family of tardigrade proteins termed secretory-abundant heat soluble (“SAHS”) proteins, and investigate their ability to protect diverse biological structures. Recombinantly expressed SAHS proteins prevent desiccated liposomes from fusion, and enhance desiccation tolerance of",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11127935/
PMC11831363,Correction to: The Evolution of Temperature and Desiccation-Related Protein Families in Tardigrada Reveals a Complex Acquisition of Extremotolerance,N/A,N/A,0,N/A,2025,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11831363/
PMC11930778,Possible roles of CAHS proteins from Tardigrade in osmotic stress tolerance in mammalian cells,Takahiro Bino; Yuhei Goto; Gembu Maryu; Kazuharu Arakawa; Kazuhiro Aoki,anhydrobiosis; Tardigrades; live imaging; disordered proteins; desiccation tolerance,40,"Anhydrobiosis, a phenomenon in which organisms survive extreme dehydration by entering a reversible ametabolic state, is a remarkable example of survival strategies. This study focuses on anhydrobiosis in tardigrades, which are known for their resilience to severe environmental conditions. Tardigrades utilize several protective mechanisms against desiccation, notably the constitutive expression of cytoplasmic abundant heat soluble (CAHS) proteins in",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11930778/
PMC8816950,Production of reactive oxygen species and involvement of bioprotectants during anhydrobiosis in the tardigrade ,Ilaria Giovannini; Thomas C. Boothby; Michele Cesari; Bob Goldstein; Roberto Guidetti; Lorena Rebecchi,Evolution; Zoology,87,"Water unavailability is an abiotic stress causing unfavourable conditions for life. Nevertheless, some animals evolved anhydrobiosis, a strategy allowing for the reversible organism dehydration and suspension of metabolism as a direct response to habitat desiccation. Anhydrobiotic animals undergo biochemical changes synthesizing bioprotectants to help combat desiccation stresses. One stress is the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In this study, the eutardigrade",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8816950/
PMC3774184,Partial weight suspension: a novel murine model for investigating adaptation to reduced musculoskeletal loading,Erika B. Wagner; Nicholas P. Granzella; Hiroaki Saito; Dava J. Newman; Laurence R. Young; Mary L. Bouxsein,mice; unloading; disuse osteoporosis; partial weightbearing; spaceflight,0,"We developed a new model of hypodynamic loading to support mice in chronic conditions of partial weight bearing, enabling simulations of reduced gravity environments and related clinical conditions. The novel hardware allows for reduced loading between 10 and 80% of normal body weight on all four limbs and enables characteristic quadrupedal locomotion. Ten-week-old female BALB/cByJ mice were supported for 21 days under Mars-analog suspension (38% weight bearing) and compared with age-matched and jacketed (100% weight bearing) controls. After an initial adaptation, weight gain did not differ between groups, suggesting low levels of animal stress. Relative to age-matched controls, mice exposed to Mars-analog loading had significantly lower muscle mass (−23% gastrocnemius wet mass,",2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3774184/
PMC4118556,"Partial Reductions in Mechanical Loading Yield Proportional Changes in Bone Density, Bone Architecture, and Muscle Mass",Rachel Ellman; Jordan Spatz; Alison Cloutier; Rupert Palme; Blaine A Christiansen; Mary L Bouxsein,MECHANICAL LOADING; DISUSE; MECHANOSTAT; FUNCTIONAL ADAPTATION; WEIGHT BEARING,0,"Although the musculoskeletal system is known to be sensitive to changes in its mechanical environment, the relationship between functional adaptation and below-normal mechanical stimuli is not well defined. We investigated bone and muscle adaptation to a range of reduced loading using the partial weight suspension (PWS) system, in which a two-point harness is used to offload a tunable amount of body weight while maintaining quadrupedal locomotion. Skeletally mature female C57Bl/6 mice were exposed to partial weight bearing at 20%, 40%, 70%, or 100% of body weight for 21 days. A hindlimb unloaded (HLU) group was included for comparison in addition to age-matched controls in normal housing. Gait kinematics was measured across the full range of weight bearing, and some minor alterations in gait from PWS were identified. With PWS, bone and muscle changes were generally proportional to the degree of unloading. Specifically, total body and hindlimb bone mineral density, calf muscle mass, trabecular bone volume of the distal femur, and cortical area of the femur midshaft were all linearly related to the degree of unloading. Even a load reduction to 70% of normal weight bearing was associated with significant bone deterioration and muscle atrophy. Weight bearing at 20% did not lead to better bone outcomes than HLU despite less muscle atrophy and presumably greater mechanical stimulus, requiring further investigation. These data confirm that the PWS model is highly effective in applying controllable, reduced, long-term loading that produces predictable, discrete adaptive changes in muscle and bone of the hindlimb.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4118556/
PMC4653813,Spaceflight and hind limb unloading induce similar changes in electrical impedance characteristics of mouse gastrocnemius muscle,M. Sung; J. Li; A.J. Spieker; J. Spatz; R. Ellman; V.L. Ferguson; T.A. Bateman; G.D. Rosen; M. Bouxsein; S.B. Rutkove,Muscle; Spaceflight; Hind Limb Unloading; Disuse; Electrical Impedance,0,"To assess the potential of electrical impedance myography (EIM) to serve as a marker of muscle fiber atrophy and secondarily as an indicator of bone deterioration by assessing the effects of spaceflight or hind limb unloading. In the first experiment, 6 mice were flown aboard the space shuttle (STS-135) for 13 days and 8 earthbound mice served as controls. In the second experiment, 14 mice underwent hind limb unloading (HLU) for 13 days; 13 additional mice served as controls. EIM measurements were made on Reductions in the multifrequency phase-slope parameter were observed for both the space flight and HLU cohorts compared to their respective controls. For ground control and spaceflight groups, the values were 24.7±1.3°/MHz and 14.1±1.6°/MHz, respectively (p=0.0013); for control and HLU groups, the values were 23.9±1.6°/MHz and 19.0±1.0°/MHz, respectively (p=0.014). This parameter also correlated with muscle fiber size (ρ=0.65, p=0.011) for spaceflight and hind limb aBMD (ρ=0.65, p=0.0063) for both groups. These data support the concept that EIM may serve as a useful tool for assessment of muscle disuse secondary to immobilization or microgravity.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4653813/
PMC6915713,Multi-omics analysis of multiple missions to space reveal a theme of lipid dysregulation in mouse liver,Afshin Beheshti; Kaushik Chakravarty; Homer Fogle; Hossein Fazelinia; Willian A. da Silveira; Valery Boyko; San-Huei Lai Polo; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; Gary Hardiman; Deanne Taylor; Jonathan M. Galazka; Sylvain V. Costes,Molecular biology; Proteomics; Risk factors; Transcriptomics; Systems biology,73,"Spaceflight has several detrimental effects on the physiology of astronauts, many of which are recapitulated in rodent models. Mouse studies performed on the Space Shuttle showed disruption of lipid metabolism in liver. However, given that these animals were not sacrificed on-orbit and instead returned live to earth, it is unclear if these disruptions were solely induced by space stressors (e.g. microgravity, space radiation) or in part explained by the stress of return to Earth. In this work we analyzed three liver datasets from two different strains of mice (C57BL/6 (Jackson) & BALB/c (Taconic)) flown aboard the International Space Station (ISS). Notably, these animals were sacrificed on-orbit and exposed to varying spaceflight durations (i.e. 21, 37, and 42 days vs 13 days for the Shuttle mice). Oil Red O (ORO) staining showed abnormal lipid accumulation in all space-flown mice compared to ground controls regardless of strain or exposure duration. Similarly, transcriptomic analysis by RNA-sequencing revealed several pathways that were affected in both strains related to increased lipid metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, lipid and fatty acid processing, lipid catabolic processing, and lipid localization. In addition, key upstream regulators were predicted to be commonly regulated across all conditions including Glucagon (GCG) and Insulin (INS). Moreover, quantitative proteomic analysis showed that a number of lipid related proteins were changed in the livers during spaceflight. Taken together, these data indicate that activation of lipotoxic pathways are the result of space stressors alone and this activation occurs in various genetic backgrounds during spaceflight exposures of weeks to months. If similar responses occur in humans, a prolonged change of these pathways may result in the development of liver disease and should be investigated further.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6915713/
PMC6124165,Treatment With a Soluble Bone Morphogenetic Protein Type 1A Receptor (BMPR1A) Fusion Protein Increases Bone Mass and Bone Formation in Mice Subjected to Hindlimb Unloading,Frank C. Ko; Miranda Van Vliet; Rachel Ellman; Daniel Grasso; Daniel J Brooks; Jordan M Spatz; Chrissy Conlon; J Ignacio Aguirre; Thomas J Wronski; Mary L Bouxsein,BMPS/TGF‐βS; BONE HISTOMORPHOMETRY; BONE QCT/μCT; BIOMECHANICS; PRECLINICAL STUDIES,21,"Previous work has shown that the soluble murine BMPR1A–fusion protein (mBMPR1A‐mFc) binds to BMP2 and BMP4 with high affinity, preventing downstream signaling. Further, treatment of intact and ovariectomized mice with mBMPR1A‐mFc leads to increased bone mass, and improved bone microarchitecture and strength, via increased bone formation and reduced resorption. In this study, we tested the effects of mBMPR1A‐mFc on disuse‐induced bone loss caused by 21 days of hindlimb unloading (HLU) via tail suspension versus cage controls (CONs). Adult female C57BL/6J mice (12 weeks old) were assigned to one of four groups (",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6124165/
PMC8509868,RNAseq and RNA molecular barcoding reveal differential gene expression in cortical bone following hindlimb unloading in female mice,Jordan M. Spatz; Frank C. Ko; Ugur M. Ayturk; Matthew L. Warman; Mary L. Bouxsein,N/A,38,"Disuse-induced bone loss is seen following spinal cord injury, prolonged bed rest, and exposure to microgravity. We performed whole transcriptomic profiling of cortical bone using RNA sequencing (RNAseq) and RNA molecular barcoding (NanoString) on a hindlimb unloading (HLU) mouse model to identify genes whose mRNA transcript abundances change in response to disuse. Eleven-week old female C57BL/6 mice were exposed to ambulatory loading or HLU for 7 days (n = 8/group). Total RNA from marrow-flushed femoral cortical bone was analyzed on HiSeq and NanoString platforms. The expression of several previously reported genes associated with Wnt signaling and metabolism was altered by HLU. Furthermore, the increased abundance of transcripts, such as Pfkfb3 and Mss51, after HLU imply these genes also have roles in the cortical bone’s response to altered mechanical loading. Our study demonstrates that an unbiased approach to assess the whole transcriptomic profile of cortical bone can reveal previously unidentified mechanosensitive genes and may eventually lead to novel targets to prevent disuse-induced osteoporosis.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8509868/
PMC11063234,Proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterization of cardiovascular tissues after long term exposure to simulated space radiation,Yared H. Kidane; Franklin H. Lee; Matthew F. Smith; Chunbo Wang; Jacqueline Barbera Mirza; Saachi Sharma; Alejandro A. Lobo; Krish C. Dewan; Jengwei Chen; Thomas E. Diaz; Michelle Mendiola Pla; Matthew W. Foster; Dawn E. Bowles,galactic cosmic ray; cardiovascular degeneration; space radiation; proteomics; mass spectrometry; ionizing radiation; cardiovascular disease; phosphoproteomics,40,,2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11063234/
PMC5672023,Adaptive Changes in the Vestibular System of Land Snail to a 30-Day Spaceflight and Readaptation on Return to Earth,Nikolay Aseyev; Alia Kh. Vinarskaya; Matvey Roshchin; Tatiana A. Korshunova; Aleksey Yu. Malyshev; Alena B. Zuzina; Victor N. Ierusalimsky; Maria S. Lemak; Igor S. Zakharov; Ivan A. Novikov; Peter Kolosov; Ekaterina Chesnokova; Svetlana Volkova; Artem Kasianov; Leonid Uroshlev; Yekaterina Popova; Richard D. Boyle; Pavel M. Balaban,mollusks; gravity sensing; statocyst; neuroplasticity; vestibular system; gravitaxis,56,"The vestibular system receives a permanent influence from gravity and reflexively controls equilibrium. If we assume gravity has remained constant during the species' evolution, will its sensory system adapt to abrupt loss of that force? We address this question in the land snail",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5672023/
PMC5899691,"Morphology of the Utricular Otolith Organ in the Toadfish, ",Richard Boyle; Reza Ehsanian; Alireza Mofrad; Yekaterina Popova; Joseph Varelas,Vestibular; hair cell; afferent; macula; biocytin; scanning electron microscopy; transmission electron microscopy; RRID:AB_2336827 Vector Lab; RRID:SCR_014199 Adobe® Photoshop®; RRID:SCR_001775 Neurolucida,0,"The utricle provides the vestibular reflex pathways with the sensory codes of inertial acceleration of self motion and head orientation with respect to gravity to control balance and equilibrium. Here we present an anatomical description of this structure in the adult oyster toadfish, and establish a morphological basis for interpretation of subsequent functional studies. Light, scanning and transmission electron microscopy techniques were applied to visualize the sensory epithelium at varying levels of detail, its neural innervation and its synaptic organization. Scanning electron microscopy was used to visualize otolith mass and morphological polarization patterns of hair cells. Afferent nerve fibers were visualized following labeling with biocytin, and light microscope images were used to make three-dimensional (3-D) reconstructions of individual labeled afferents to identify dendritic morphology with respect to epithelial location. Transmission electron micrographs were compiled to create a serial 3-D reconstruction of a labeled afferent over a segment of its dendritic field and to examine the cell-afferent synaptic contacts. Major observations are: a well-defined striola, medial and lateral extra-striolar regions with a zonal organization of hair bundles; prominent lacinia projecting laterally; dependence of hair cell density on macular location; narrow afferent dendritic fields that follow the hair bundle polarization; synaptic specializations issued by afferents are typically directed towards a limited number of 7–13 hair cells, but larger dendritic fields in the medial extra-striola can be associated with > 20 hair cells also; and hair cell synaptic bodies can be confined to only an individual afferent or can synapse upon several afferents.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5899691/
PMC6204554,"Influence of Magnitude and Duration of Altered Gravity and Readaptation to 1 g on the Structure and Function of the Utricle in Toadfish, ",Richard Boyle; Yekaterina Popova; Joseph Varelas,afferents; hair cells; acceleration; gravity; centrifugation; spaceflight; electrophysiology; serial electron microscopy reconstruction,125,"Gravity has remained constant during animal evolution and the neural sensory systems detecting acceleration forces have remained remarkably conserved among vertebrates. The utricular organ senses the sum of inertial force due to head translation and head tilt relative to gravitational vertical. Change in gravitational force would be expected to have profound effects on how an organism maintains equilibrium. We characterize the physiology of utricular afferents to applied accelerations in the oyster toadfish,",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6204554/
PMC4064004,Organization of the ER–Golgi interface for membrane traffic control,Federica Brandizzi; Charles Barlowe,N/A,0,"Coat protein complex I (COPI) and COPII are required for bidirectional membrane trafficking between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi. While these core coat machineries and other transport factors are highly conserved across species, high-resolution imaging studies indicate that the organization of the ER–Golgi interface is varied in eukaryotic cells. Regulation of COPII assembly, in some cases to manage distinct cellular cargo, is emerging as one important component in determining this structure. Comparison of the ER–Golgi interface across different systems, particularly mammalian and plant cells, reveals fundamental elements and distinct organization of this interface. A better understanding of how these interfaces are regulated to meet varying cellular secretory demands should provide key insights into the mechanisms that control efficient trafficking of proteins and lipids through the secretory pathway.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4064004/
PMC3818365,IRE1: ER stress sensor and cell fate executor,Yani Chen; Federica Brandizzi,unfolded protein response; ER stress; IRE1; cell fate; protein quality control; membrane trafficking system,0,"Cells operate a signaling network termed unfolded protein response (UPR) to monitor protein-folding capacity in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). IRE1 is an ER transmembrane sensor that activates UPR to maintain ER and cellular function. While mammalian IRE1 promotes cell survive, it can initiate apoptosis via decay of anti-apoptotic microRNAs. Convergent and divergent IRE1 characteristics between plants and animals underscore its significance in cellular homeostasis. This review provides an updated scenario of IRE1 signaling model, discusses emerging IRE1 sensing mechanisms, compares IRE1 features among species, and outlines exciting future directions in UPR research.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3818365/
PMC3981873,INTER-REGULATION OF THE UNFOLDED PROTEIN RESPONSE AND AUXIN SIGNALING,Yani Chen; Kyaw Aung; Jakub Rolčík; Kathryn Walicki; Jiří Friml; Federica Brandizzi,ER stress; unfolded protein response; auxin response; IRE1; PIN5,0,"The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a signaling network triggered by overload of protein-folding demand in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a condition termed ER stress. The UPR is critical for growth and development; nonetheless, connections between the UPR and other cellular regulatory processes remain largely unknown. Here, we identify a link between the UPR and the phytohormone auxin, a master regulator of plant physiology. We show that ER stress triggers down-regulation of auxin sensors and transporters in",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3981873/
PMC4150462,Endoplasmic reticulum—shape and function in stress translation,Federica Brandizzi; Lorenzo Frigerio; Stephen H. Howell; Patrick Schäfer,unfolded protein response (UPR); ER associated degradation (ERAD); ER stress; bZIP transcription factors; myosins; caspases; ER bodies; cysteine endopeptidase; programmed cell death,11,N/A,2014,editorial,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4150462/
PMC4378170,Galactose-Depleted Xyloglucan Is Dysfunctional and Leads to Dwarfism in Arabidopsis,Yingzhen Kong; Maria J. Peña; Luciana Renna; Utku Avci; Sivakumar Pattathil; Sami T. Tuomivaara; Xuemei Li; Wolf-Dieter Reiter; Federica Brandizzi; Michael G. Hahn; Alan G. Darvill; William S. York; Malcolm A. O’Neill,N/A,0,Depleting galactose from the cell wall polysaccharide xyloglucan leads to a disruption of diverse cellular and physiological processes involved in normal plant growth.,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4378170/
PMC4618186,"Unfolded protein response in plants: one master, many questions",Cristina Ruberti; Sang-Jin Kim; Giovanni Stefano; Federica Brandizzi,N/A,0,"To overcome endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, ER-localized stress sensors actuate distinct downstream organelle-nucleus signaling pathways to invoke a cytoprotective response, known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). Compared to yeast and metazoans, plant UPR studies are more recent but nevertheless fascinating. Here we discuss recent discoveries in plant UPR, highlight conserved and unique features of the plant UPR as well as critical yet-open questions whose answers will likely make significant contributions to the understanding plant ER stress management.",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4618186/
PMC4453782,Vesicles versus Tubes: Is Endoplasmic Reticulum-Golgi Transport in Plants Fundamentally Different from Other Eukaryotes?,David G. Robinson; Federica Brandizzi; Chris Hawes; Akihiko Nakano,N/A,0,Four leading cell biologists reflect on the controversial nature of the vector for transport between the ER and Golgi apparatus in higher plants.,2015,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4453782/
PMC4902601,Pectin Methylesterification Impacts the Relationship between Photosynthesis and Plant Growth,Sarathi M. Weraduwage; Sang-Jin Kim; Luciana Renna; Fransisca C. Anozie; Thomas D. Sharkey; Federica Brandizzi,N/A,0,"High levels of methylesterification of pectin allow for enhanced cell expansion, partitioning of resources to leaf growth, and increased leaf area for photosynthesis, which in turn enhance plant growth.",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4902601/
PMC4776492,,Robert M. Larkin; Giovanni Stefano; Michael E. Ruckle; Andrea K. Stavoe; Christopher A. Sinkler; Federica Brandizzi; Carolyn M. Malmstrom; Katherine W. Osteryoung,chloroplast coverage; chloroplast; plastid signaling; chlorophyll,0,Mechanisms that determine the cellular volume allocated to organelles are largely unknown. We demonstrate that in the plant,2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4776492/
PMC5415411,Maintaining the Factory: The Roles of the Unfolded Protein Response in Cellular Homeostasis in Plants,Evan Angelos; Cristina Ruberti; Sang-Jin Kim; Federica Brandizzi,Unfolded protein response; ER stress; IRE1; bZIP60; bZIP28,0,"Much like a factory, the endoplasmic reticulum assembles simple cellular building blocks into complex molecular machines known as proteins. In order to protect the delicate protein folding process and ensure the proper cellular delivery of protein products under environmental stresses, eukaryotes have evolved a set of signaling mechanisms known as the unfolded protein response (UPR) to increase the folding capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum. This process is particularly important in plants, because their sessile nature commands adaptation for survival rather than escape from stress. As such, plants make special use of the UPR, and evidence indicates that the master regulators and downstream effectors of the UPR have distinct roles in mediating cellular processes that affect organism growth and development as well as stress responses. In this review we outline recent developments in this field that support a strong relevance of the UPR to many areas of plant life.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5415411/
PMC6289879,NADPH Oxidase activity is required for ER stress survival in plants,Evan Angelos; Federica Brandizzi,Unfolded protein response; ER stress; reactive oxygen species; RBOHD; RBOHF,0,"In all eukaryotes, the unfolded protein response (UPR) relieves endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which is a potentially lethal condition caused by the accumulation of misfolded proteins in the ER. In mammalian and yeast cells, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated during ER stress attenuate the UPR, negatively impacting cell survival. In plants, the relationship between the UPR and ROS is less clear. Although ROS develop during ER stress, the sources of ROS linked to ER stress responses and the physiological impact of ROS generation on the survival from proteotoxic stress are yet unknown. Here we show that in",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6289879/
PMC7987364,Relevance of the Unfolded Protein Response to Spaceflight-Induced Transcriptional Reprogramming in ,Evan Angelos; Dae Kwan Ko; Starla Zemelis-Durfee; Federica Brandizzi,Spaceflight; Unfolded protein response; Microgravity.,0,"Plants are primary producers of food and oxygen on Earth and will likewise be indispensable to the establishment of large-scale sustainable ecosystems and human survival in space. To contribute to the understanding of how plants respond to spaceflight stress, we examined the significance of the unfolded protein response (UPR), a conserved signaling cascade that responds to a number of unfavorable environmental stresses, in the model plant",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7987364/
PMC8099722,Reanalysis of the Mars500 experiment reveals common gut microbiome alterations in astronauts induced by long-duration confinement,N.J.B. Brereton; F.E. Pitre; E. Gonzalez,Microbiome; Mars; Space science; Astronaut health; 16S rRNA gene,100,N/A,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8099722/
PMC5116466,"Corrigendum: High atomic weight, high-energy radiation (HZE) induces transcriptional responses shared with conventional stresses in addition to a core “DSB” response specific to clastogenic treatments",Victor Missirian; Phillip A. Conklin; Kevin M. Culligan; Neil D. Huefner; Anne B. Britt,DNA repair; double-strand breaks; transcriptomics; stress; cell-cycle; ionizing radiation; HZE; gamma radiation,0,N/A,2016,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5116466/
PMC4033213,Genomic stability in response to high versus low linear energy transfer radiation in ,Neil D. Huefner; Kaoru Yoshiyama; Joanna D. Friesner; Phillip A. Conklin; Anne B. Britt,ATM; ATR; double-strand breaks; genomic instability; KU80; LIG4; radiation,48,"Low linear energy transfer (LET) gamma rays and high LET HZE (high atomic weight, high energy) particles act as powerful mutagens in both plants and animals. DNA damage generated by HZE particles is more densely clustered than that generated by gamma rays. To understand the genetic requirements for resistance to high versus low LET radiation, a series of",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4033213/
PMC6081456,Acceleration profiles and processing methods for parabolic flight,Christopher E. Carr; Noelle C. Bryan; Kendall N. Saboda; Srinivasa A. Bhattaru; Gary Ruvkun; Maria T. Zuber,N/A,9,"Parabolic flights provide cost-effective, time-limited access to “weightless” or reduced gravity conditions, facilitating research and validation activities that complement infrequent and costly access to space. Although parabolic flights have been conducted for decades, reference acceleration profiles and processing methods are not widely available. Here we present a solution for collecting, analyzing, and classifying the altered gravity environments experienced during parabolic flights, which we validated during a Boeing 727-200F flight with 20 parabolas. All data and analysis code are freely available. Our solution can be integrated with diverse experimental designs, does not depend upon accelerometer orientation, and allows unsupervised classification of all phases of flight, providing a consistent and open-source approach to quantifying gravito-inertial accelerations (GIA), or",2018,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6081456/
PMC5955502,Cytoskeleton structure and total methylation of mouse cardiac and lung tissue during space flight,Irina V. Ogneva; Sergey S. Loktev; Vladimir N. Sychev,N/A,67,"The purpose of this work was to evaluate the protein and mRNA expression levels of multiple cytoskeletal proteins in the cardiac and lung tissue of mice that were euthanized onboard the United States Orbital Segment of the International Space Station 37 days after the start of the SpaceX-4 mission (September 2014, USA). The results showed no changes in the cytoskeletal protein content in the cardiac and lung tissue of the mice, but there were significant changes in the mRNA expression levels of the associated genes, which may be due to an increase in total genome methylation. The mRNA expression levels of DNA methylases, the cytosine demethylases Tet1 and Tet3, histone acetylase and histone deacetylase did not change, and the mRNA expression level of cytosine demethylase Tet2 was significantly decreased.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5955502/
PMC10285634,Toward countering muscle and bone loss with spaceflight: GSK3 as a potential target,Ryan W. Baranowski; Jessica L. Braun; Briana L. Hockey; Jenalyn L. Yumol; Mia S. Geromella; Colton J.F. Watson; Nigel Kurgan; Holt N. Messner; Kennedy C. Whitley; Adam J. MacNeil; Guillemette Gauquelin-Koch; Fabrice Bertile; William Gittings; Rene Vandenboom; Wendy E. Ward; Val A. Fajardo,Musculoskeletal medicine; Space medicine,51,"We examined the effects of ∼30 days of spaceflight on glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) content and inhibitory serine phosphorylation in murine muscle and bone samples from four separate missions (BION-M1, rodent research [RR]1, RR9, and RR18). Spaceflight reduced GSK3β content across all missions, whereas its serine phosphorylation was elevated with RR18 and BION-M1. The reduction in GSK3β was linked to the reduction in type IIA fibers commonly observed with spaceflight as these fibers are particularly enriched with GSK3. We then tested the effects of inhibiting GSK3 before this fiber type shift, and we demonstrate that muscle-specific",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10285634/
PMC11271499,Spaceflight increases sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca,Jessica L. Braun; Val A. Fajardo,Calcium channels; Physiology,83,"Spending time in a microgravity environment is known to cause significant skeletal muscle atrophy and weakness via muscle unloading, which can be partly attributed to Ca",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11271499/
PMC6062551,Cardiovascular progenitor cells cultured aboard the International Space Station exhibit altered developmental and functional properties,Jonathan Baio; Aida F. Martinez; Ivan Silva; Carla V. Hoehn; Stephanie Countryman; Leonard Bailey; Nahidh Hasaniya; Michael J. Pecaut; Mary Kearns-Jonker,N/A,43,"The heart and its cellular components are profoundly altered by missions to space and injury on Earth. Further research, however, is needed to characterize and address the molecular substrates of such changes. For this reason, neonatal and adult human cardiovascular progenitor cells (CPCs) were cultured aboard the International Space Station. Upon return to Earth, we measured changes in the expression of microRNAs and of genes related to mechanotransduction, cardiogenesis, cell cycling, DNA repair, and paracrine signaling. We additionally assessed endothelial-like tube formation, cell cycling, and migratory capacity of CPCs. Changes in microRNA expression were predicted to target extracellular matrix interactions and Hippo signaling in both neonatal and adult CPCs. Genes related to mechanotransduction (",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6062551/
PMC9832585,Inter-agency perspective: Translating advances in biomarker discovery and medical countermeasures development between terrestrial and space radiation environments,Andrea L. DiCarlo; Lisa S. Carnell; Carmen I. Rios; Pataje G. Prasanna,Space; Radiation; Medical countermeasures; Chronic; Cancer; Biomarkers,120,"Over the past 20+ years, the U.S. Government has made significant strides in establishing research funding and initiating a portfolio consisting of subject matter experts on radiation-induced biological effects in normal tissues. Research supported by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) provided much of the early findings on identifying cellular pathways involved in radiation injuries, due to the need to push the boundaries to kill tumor cells while minimizing damage to intervening normal tissues. By protecting normal tissue surrounding the tumors, physicians can deliver a higher radiation dose to tumors and reduce adverse effects related to the treatment. Initially relying on this critical NCI research, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), first tasked with developing radiation medical countermeasures in 2004, has provided bridge funding to move basic research toward advanced development and translation. The goal of the NIAID program is to fund approaches that can one day be employed to protect civilian populations during a radiological or nuclear incident. In addition, with the reality of long-term space flights and the possibility of radiation exposures to both acute, high-intensity, and chronic lower-dose levels, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has identified requirements to discover and develop radioprotectors and mitigators to protect their astronauts during space missions. In sustained partnership with sister agencies, these three organizations must continue to leverage funding and findings in their overlapping research areas to accelerate biomarker identification and product development to help safeguard these different and yet undeniably similar human populations – cancer patients, public citizens, and astronauts.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9832585/
PMC7829349,Genomic and Functional Characterization of ,Noelle C. Bryan; Francois Lebreton; Michael Gilmore; Gary Ruvkun; Maria T. Zuber; Christopher E. Carr,International Space Station (ISS); pangenome; antibiotic resistance; desiccation tolerance; pathogenicity,72,N/A,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7829349/
PMC3570223,Evaluation of ,M. Teresa Ortega; Nanyan Lu; Stephen K. Chapes,Gene expression; Differentiation; Macrophage colony stimulating factors; STS-126,0,"We differentiated mouse bone marrow cells in the presence of recombinant macrophage colony stimulating (rM-CSF) factor for 14 days during the flight of space shuttle Space Transportation System (STS)-126. We tested the hypothesis that the receptor expression for M-CSF, c-Fms was reduced. We used flow cytometry to assess molecules on cells that were preserved during flight to define the differentiation state of the developing bone marrow macrophages; including CD11b, CD31, CD44, Ly6C, Ly6G, F4/80, Mac2, c-Fos as well as c-Fms. In addition, RNA was preserved during the flight and was used to perform a gene microarray. We found that there were significant differences in the number of macrophages that developed in space compared to controls maintained on Earth. We found that there were significant changes in the distribution of cells that expressed CD11b, CD31, F4/80, Mac2, Ly6C and c-Fos. However, there were no changes in c-Fms expression and no consistent pattern of advanced or retarded differentiation during space flight. We also found a pattern of transcript levels that would be consistent with a relatively normal differentiation outcome but increased proliferation by the bone marrow macrophages that were assayed after 14 days of space flight. There also was a surprising pattern of space flight influence on genes of the coagulation pathway. These data confirm that a space flight can have an impact on the",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3570223/
PMC3457586,Identification of Critical Host Mitochondrion-Associated Genes during ,Tonia Von Ohlen; Alison Luce-Fedrow; M. Teresa Ortega; Roman R. Ganta; Stephen K. Chapes,N/A,0,N/A,2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3457586/
PMC3558598,,Rishi Drolia; Tonia Von Ohlen; Stephen K. Chapes,Hemocytes; RNAi; Host-bacteria interactions; Intracellular bacteria,0,N/A,2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3558598/
PMC11046949,"Antiviral screening of natural, anti-inflammatory compound library against African swine fever virus",Joshua A. Jackman; Astghik Hakobyan; Rafayela Grigoryan; Roza Izmailyan; Charles C. Elrod; Hovakim Zakaryan,African swine fever virus; Antiviral; Anti-inflammatory; Cytokine production; Screening,41,"African swine fever virus (ASFV) is a major threat to pig production and the lack of effective vaccines underscores the need to develop robust antiviral countermeasures. Pathologically, a significant elevation in pro-inflammatory cytokine production is associated with ASFV infection in pigs and there is high interest in identifying dual-acting natural compounds that exhibit antiviral and anti-inflammatory activities. Using the laboratory-adapted ASFV BA71V strain, we screened a library of 297 natural, anti-inflammatory compounds to identify promising candidates that protected Vero cells against virus-induced cytopathic effect (CPE). Virus yield reduction, virucidal, and cell cytotoxicity experiments were performed on positive hits and two lead compounds were further characterized in dose-dependent assays along with time-of-addition, time-of-removal, virus entry, and viral protein synthesis assays. The antiviral effects of the two lead compounds on mitigating virulent ASFV infection in porcine macrophages (PAMs) were also tested using similar methods, and the ability to inhibit pro-inflammatory cytokine production during virulent ASFV infection was assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The screen identified five compounds that inhibited ASFV-induced CPE by greater than 50% and virus yield reduction experiments showed that two of these compounds, tetrandrine and berbamine, exhibited particularly high levels of anti-ASFV activity. Mechanistic analysis confirmed that both compounds potently inhibited early stages of ASFV infection and that the compounds also inhibited infection of PAMs by the virulent ASFV Arm/07 isolate. Importantly, during ASFV infection in PAM cells, both compounds markedly reduced the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines involved in disease pathogenesis while tetrandrine had a greater and more sustained anti-inflammatory effect than berbamine. Together, these findings support that dual-acting natural compounds with antiviral and anti-inflammatory properties hold promise as preventative and therapeutic agents to combat ASFV infection by simultaneously inhibiting viral replication and reducing virus-induced cytokine production. The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12985-024-02374-2.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11046949/
PMC3890248,Understanding macrophage differentiation during space flight: The importance of ground-based experiments before space flight,Stephen K. Chapes; M. Teresa Ortega,cell differentiation; macrophage; fluid processing apparatus; space flight hardware,0,"In preparation for a space flight on STS-126, two",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3890248/
PMC3868799,Bone Marrow Leptin Signaling Mediates Obesity-Associated Adipose Tissue Inflammation in Male Mice,Lea H. Dib; M. Teresa Ortega; Sherry D. Fleming; Stephen K. Chapes; Tonatiuh Melgarejo,N/A,0,"Obesity is characterized by an increased recruitment of proinflammatory macrophages to the adipose tissue (AT), leading to systemic inflammation and metabolic disease. The pathogenesis of this AT inflammation, however, remains to be elucidated. The circulating adipokine leptin is increased in obesity and is involved in immune cell function and activation. In the present study, we investigated the role of leptin in the induction of obesity-associated inflammation. We generated radiation chimeric C57BL/6J mice reconstituted with either leptin receptor-deficient (",2013,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3868799/
PMC4960141,Establishment and characterization of DB-1: a leptin receptor-deficient murine macrophage cell line,Lea H. Dib; M. Teresa Ortega; Tonatiuh Melgarejo; Stephen K. Chapes,Macrophages; Leptin receptor; Immortal cell line,0,"Metabolic and immune mediators activate many of the same signal transduction pathways. Therefore, molecules that regulate metabolism often affect immune responses. Leptin is an adipokine that exemplifies this interplay. Leptin is the body’s major nutritional status sensor, but it also plays a key role in immune system regulation. To provide an in vitro tool to investigate the link between leptin and innate immunity, we immortalized and characterized a leptin receptor-deficient macrophage cell line, DB-1. The cell line was created using bone marrow cells from leptin receptor-deficient mice. Bone marrow cells were differentiated into macrophages by culturing them with recombinant mouse macrophage colony stimulating factor, and passaged when confluent for 6 months. The cells spontaneously immortalized at approximately passage 20. Cells were cloned twice by limiting dilution cloning prior to characterization. The macrophage cell line is diploid and grows at a linear rate for 4–5 days before reaching the growth plateau. The cells are MAC-2 and F4/80 positive and have phagocytic activity similar to primary macrophages from wild-type and leptin receptor-deficient mice. DB-1 cells were responsive to stimulation with interferon-γ as measured by increase in",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4960141/
PMC5736159,Validation of Methods to Assess the Immunoglobulin Gene Repertoire in Tissues Obtained from Mice on the International Space Station,Trisha A Rettig; Claire Ward; Michael J Pecaut; Stephen K. Chapes,Immunoglobulin Gene Use; Next Generation Sequencing; Bioinformatics,0,"Spaceflight is known to affect immune cell populations. In particular, splenic B cell numbers decrease during spaceflight and in ground-based physiological models. Although antibody isotype changes have been assessed during and after space flight, an extensive characterization of the impact of spaceflight on antibody composition has not been conducted in mice. Next Generation Sequencing and bioinformatic tools are now available to assess antibody repertoires. We can now identify immunoglobulin gene- segment usage, junctional regions, and modifications that contribute to specificity and diversity. Due to limitations on the International Space Station, alternate sample collection and storage methods must be employed. Our group compared Illumina MiSeq sequencing data from multiple sample preparation methods in normal C57Bl/6J mice to validate that sample preparation and storage would not bias the outcome of antibody repertoire characterization. In this report, we also compared sequencing techniques and a bioinformatic workflow on the data output when we assessed the IgH and Igκ variable gene usage. This included assessments of our bioinformatic workflow on Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq datasets and is specifically designed to reduce bias, capture the most information from Ig sequences, and produce a data set that provides other data mining options. We validated our workflow by comparing our normal mouse MiSeq data to existing murine antibody repertoire studies validating it for future antibody repertoire studies.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5736159/
PMC5761896,Characterization of the naive murine antibody repertoire using unamplified high-throughput sequencing,Trisha A. Rettig; Claire Ward; Bailey A. Bye; Michael J. Pecaut; Stephen K. Chapes,N/A,61,"Antibody specificity and diversity are generated through the enzymatic splicing of genomic gene segments within each B cell. Antibodies are heterodimers of heavy- and light-chains encoded on separate loci. We studied the antibody repertoire from pooled, splenic tissue of unimmunized, adult female C57BL/6J mice, using high-throughput sequencing (HTS) without amplification of antibody transcripts. We recovered over 90,000 heavy-chain and over 135,000 light-chain immunoglobulin sequences. Individual V-, D-, and J-gene segment usage was uniform among the three mouse pools, particularly in highly abundant gene segments, with low frequency V-gene segments not being detected in all pools. Despite the similar usage of individual gene segments, the repertoire of individual B-cell CDR3 amino acid sequences in each mouse pool was highly varied, affirming the combinatorial diversity in the B-cell pool that has been previously demonstrated. There also was some skewing in the V-gene segments that were detected depending on chromosomal location. This study presents a unique, non-primer biased glimpse of the conventionally housed, unimmunized antibody repertoire of the C57BL6/J mouse.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5761896/
PMC5826609,Effects of spaceflight on the immunoglobulin repertoire of unimmunized C57BL/6 mice,Claire Ward; Trisha A. Rettig; Savannah Hlavacek; Bailey A. Bye; Michael J. Pecaut; Stephen K. Chapes,Immunoglobulin Gene Use; Next Generation Sequencing; Bioinformatics,0,"Spaceflight has been shown to suppress the adaptive immune response, altering the distribution and function of lymphocyte populations. B lymphocytes express highly specific and highly diversified receptors, known as immunoglobulins (Ig), that directly bind and neutralize pathogens. Ig diversity is achieved through the enzymatic splicing of gene segments within the genomic DNA of each B cell in a host. The collection of Ig specificities within a host, or Ig repertoire, has been increasingly characterized in both basic research and clinical settings using high-throughput sequencing technology (HTS). We utilized HTS to test the hypothesis that spaceflight affects the B-cell repertoire. To test this hypothesis, we characterized the impact of spaceflight on the unimmunized Ig repertoire of C57BL/6 mice that were flown aboard the International Space Station (ISS) during the Rodent Research One validation flight in comparison to ground controls. Individual gene segment usage was similar between ground control and flight animals, however, gene segment combinations and the junctions in which gene segments combine was varied among animals within and between treatment groups. We also found that spontaneous somatic mutations in the IgH and Igκ gene loci were not increased. These data suggest that space flight did not affect the B cell repertoire of mice flown and housed on the ISS over a short period of time.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5826609/
PMC6366624,A comparison of unamplified and massively multiplexed PCR amplification for murine antibody repertoire sequencing,Trisha A. Rettig; Michael J. Pecaut; Stephen K. Chapes,High throughput sequencing; Immunoglobulin genes; Mouse; Heavy Chain; RepSEQ,0,"Sequencing antibody repertoires has steadily become cheaper and easier. Sequencing methods usually rely on some form of amplification, often a massively multiplexed PCR prior to sequencing. To eliminate potential biases and create a data set that could be used for other studies, our lab compared unamplified sequencing results from the splenic heavy-chain repertoire in the mouse to those processed through two commercial applications. We also compared the use of mRNA vs total RNA, reverse transcriptase, and primer usage for cDNA synthesis and submission. The use of mRNA for cDNA synthesis resulted in higher read counts but reverse transcriptase and primer usage had no statistical effects on read count. Although most of the amplified data sets contained more antibody reads than the unamplified data set, we detected more unique V-gene segments in the unamplified data set. Although unique CDR3 detection was much lower in the unamplified data set, RNASeq detected 98% of the high frequency CDR3s. We have shown that unamplified profiling of the antibody repertoire is possible, detects more V-gene segments, and detects high frequency clones in the repertoire.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6366624/
PMC11929063,"Preclinical development of TAK-754, a high-performance AAV8-based vector expressing coagulation factor VIII",Johannes Lengler; Markus Weiller; Franziska Horling; Josef Mayrhofer; Maria Schuster; Falko G. Falkner; Irene Gil-Farina; Matthias Klugmann; Friedrich Scheiflinger; Werner Hoellriegl; Hanspeter Rottensteiner,hemophilia A; gene therapy; adeno-associated virus; AAV; FVIII; biodistribution; safety; vector integration; vector immunogenicity,68,"This report concerns the preclinical development of TAK-754, an AAV8-based human factor VIII (FVIII) vector designed to deliver a codon-optimized and CpG-depleted B domain-deleted",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11929063/
PMC11929063,"Preclinical development of TAK-754, a high-performance AAV8-based vector expressing coagulation factor VIII",Johannes Lengler; Markus Weiller; Franziska Horling; Josef Mayrhofer; Maria Schuster; Falko G. Falkner; Irene Gil-Farina; Matthias Klugmann; Friedrich Scheiflinger; Werner Hoellriegl; Hanspeter Rottensteiner,hemophilia A; gene therapy; adeno-associated virus; AAV; FVIII; biodistribution; safety; vector integration; vector immunogenicity,68,"This report concerns the preclinical development of TAK-754, an AAV8-based human factor VIII (FVIII) vector designed to deliver a codon-optimized and CpG-depleted B domain-deleted",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11929063/
PMC10996920,An Analysis of the Effects of Spaceflight and Vaccination on Antibody Repertoire Diversity,Trisha A. Rettig; John C. Tan; Nina C. Nishiyama; Stephen K. Chapes; Michael J. Pecaut,N/A,42,"Ab repertoire diversity plays a critical role in the host’s ability to fight pathogens. CDR3 is partially responsible for Ab–Ag binding and is a significant source of diversity in the repertoire. CDR3 diversity is generated during VDJ rearrangement because of gene segment selection, gene segment trimming and splicing, and the addition of nucleotides. We analyzed the Ab repertoire diversity across multiple experiments examining the effects of spaceflight on the Ab repertoire after vaccination. Five datasets from four experiments were analyzed using rank-abundance curves and Shannon indices as measures of diversity. We discovered a trend toward lower diversity as a result of spaceflight but did not find the same decrease in our physiological model of microgravity in either the spleen or bone marrow. However, the bone marrow repertoire showed a reduction in diversity after vaccination. We also detected differences in Shannon indices between experiments and tissues. We did not detect a pattern of CDR3 usage across the experiments. Overall, we were able to find differences in the Ab repertoire diversity across experimental groups and tissues.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10996920/
PMC7954810,Effects of spaceflight aboard the International Space Station on mouse estrous cycle and ovarian gene expression,Xiaoman Hong; Anamika Ratri; Sungshin Y. Choi; Joseph S. Tash; April E. Ronca; Joshua S. Alwood; Lane K. Christenson,Physiology; Developmental biology,31,"Ovarian steroids dramatically impact normal homeostatic and metabolic processes of most tissues within the body, including muscle, bone, neural, immune, cardiovascular, and reproductive systems. Determining the effects of spaceflight on the ovary and estrous cycle is, therefore, critical to our understanding of all spaceflight experiments using female mice. Adult female mice (",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7954810/
PMC4228280,Effect of spaceflight on ,Wooseong Kim; Farah K Tengra; Jasmine Shong; Nicholas Marchand; Hon Kit Chan; Zachary Young; Ravindra C Pangule; Macarena Parra; Jonathan S Dordick; Joel L Plawsky; Cynthia H Collins,Spaceflight; Microgravity; Flow cytometry; Motility,50,"Abundant populations of bacteria have been observed on Mir and the International Space Station. While some experiments have shown that bacteria cultured during spaceflight exhibit a range of potentially troublesome characteristics, including increases in growth, antibiotic resistance and virulence, other studies have shown minimal differences when cells were cultured during spaceflight or on Earth. Although the final cell density of bacteria grown during spaceflight has been reported for several species, we are not yet able to predict how different microorganisms will respond to the microgravity environment. In order to build our understanding of how spaceflight affects bacterial final cell densities, additional studies are needed to determine whether the observed differences are due to varied methods, experimental conditions, or organism specific responses. Here, we have explored how phosphate concentration, carbon source, oxygen availability, and motility affect the growth of These results indicate that differences in bacterial final cell densities observed between spaceflight and normal gravity are due to an interplay between microgravity conditions and the availability of substrates essential for growth. Further, our results suggest that microbes grown under nutrient-limiting conditions are likely to reach higher cell densities under microgravity conditions than they would on Earth. Considering that the majority of bacteria inhabiting spacecrafts and space stations are likely to live under nutrient limitations, our findings highlight the need to explore the impact microgravity and other aspects of the spaceflight environment have on microbial growth and physiology.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4228280/
PMC3639165,Spaceflight Promotes Biofilm Formation by ,Wooseong Kim; Farah K. Tengra; Zachary Young; Jasmine Shong; Nicholas Marchand; Hon Kit Chan; Ravindra C. Pangule; Macarena Parra; Jonathan S. Dordick; Joel L. Plawsky; Cynthia H. Collins,N/A,34,"Understanding the effects of spaceflight on microbial communities is crucial for the success of long-term, manned space missions. Surface-associated bacterial communities, known as biofilms, were abundant on the Mir space station and continue to be a challenge on the International Space Station. The health and safety hazards linked to the development of biofilms are of particular concern due to the suppression of immune function observed during spaceflight. While planktonic cultures of microbes have indicated that spaceflight can lead to increases in growth and virulence, the effects of spaceflight on biofilm development and physiology remain unclear. To address this issue,",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3639165/
PMC8044432,NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus pipeline: standardized processing of short-read RNA-seq data,Eliah G. Overbey; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; Zhe Zhang; Komal S. Rathi; Homer Fogle; Willian A. da Silveira; Richard J. Barker; Joseph J. Bass; Afshin Beheshti; Daniel C. Berrios; Elizabeth A. Blaber; Egle Cekanaviciute; Helio A. Costa; Laurence B. Davin; Kathleen M. Fisch; Samrawit G. Gebre; Matthew Geniza; Rachel Gilbert; Simon Gilroy; Gary Hardiman; Raúl Herranz; Yared H. Kidane; Colin P.S. Kruse; Michael D. Lee; Ted Liefeld; Norman G. Lewis; J. Tyson McDonald; Robert Meller; Tejaswini Mishra; Imara Y. Perera; Shayoni Ray; Sigrid S. Reinsch; Sara Brin Rosenthal; Michael Strong; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Candice G.T. Tahimic; Deanne M. Taylor; Joshua P. Vandenbrink; Alicia Villacampa; Silvio Weging; Chris Wolverton; Sarah E. Wyatt; Luis Zea; Sylvain V. Costes; Jonathan M. Galazka,Omics; Space Sciences,50,"With the development of transcriptomic technologies, we are able to quantify precise changes in gene expression profiles from astronauts and other organisms exposed to spaceflight. Members of NASA GeneLab and GeneLab-associated analysis working groups (AWGs) have developed a consensus pipeline for analyzing short-read RNA-sequencing data from spaceflight-associated experiments. The pipeline includes quality control, read trimming, mapping, and gene quantification steps, culminating in the detection of differentially expressed genes. This data analysis pipeline and the results of its execution using data submitted to GeneLab are now all publicly available through the GeneLab database. We present here the full details and rationale for the construction of this pipeline in order to promote transparency, reproducibility, and reusability of pipeline data; to provide a template for data processing of future spaceflight-relevant datasets; and to encourage cross-analysis of data from other databases with the data available in GeneLab.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8044432/
PMC7778922,NASA GeneLab: interfaces for the exploration of space omics data,Daniel C Berrios; Jonathan Galazka; Kirill Grigorev; Samrawit Gebre; Sylvain V Costes,N/A,32,The mission of NASA’s GeneLab database (,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7778922/
PMC7870178,Comprehensive Multi-Omics Analysis Reveals Mitochondrial Stress as a Central Biological Hub for Spaceflight Impact,Willian A. da Silveira; Hossein Fazelinia; Sara Brin Rosenthal; Evagelia C. Laiakis; Man S Kim; Cem Meydan; Yared Kidane; Komal S. Rathi; Scott M. Smith; Benjamin Stear; Yue Ying; Yuanchao Zhang; Jonathan Foox; Susana Zanello; Brian Crucian; Dong Wang; Adrienne Nugent; Helio A. Costa; Sara R. Zwart; Sonja Schrepfer; R. A. Leo Elworth; Nicolae Sapoval; Todd Treangen; Matthew MacKay; Nandan S. Gokhale; Stacy M. Horner; Larry N. Singh; Douglas C. Wallace; Jeffrey S. Willey; Jonathan C. Schisler; Robert Meller; J. Tyson McDonald; Kathleen M. Fisch; Gary Hardiman; Deanne Taylor; Christopher E. Mason; Sylvain V. Costes; Afshin Beheshti,Mitochondria; lipids; spaceflight; GeneLab; NASA Twin Study; NASA; Rodent Research Missions; cell cycle; oxidative phosphorylation; immune system; circadian rhythm; olfactory pathways; microgravity; space radiation; metabolism; metabolic modeling; proteomics; transcriptomics; metabolomics,0,"Spaceflight is known to impose changes on human physiology with unknown molecular etiologies. To reveal these causes, we used a multi-omics, systems biology analytical approach using biomedical profiles from fifty-nine astronauts and data from NASA’s GeneLab derived from hundreds of samples flown in space, to determine transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, and epigenetic responses to spaceflight. Overall pathway analyses on the multi-omic datasets showed significant enrichment for mitochondrial processes, as well as innate immunity, chronic inflammation, cell cycle, circadian rhythm, and olfactory functions. Importantly, NASA’s Twin Study provided a platform to confirm several of our principal findings. Evidence of altered mitochondrial function and DNA damage was also found in the urine and blood metabolic data compiled from the astronaut cohort and NASA Twin Study data, indicating mitochondrial stress as a consistent phenotype of spaceflight.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7870178/
PMC7733874,A New Era for Space Life Science: International Standards for Space Omics Processing,Lindsay Rutter; Richard Barker; Daniela Bezdan; Henry Cope; Sylvain V. Costes; Lovorka Degoricija; Kathleen M. Fisch; Mariano I. Gabitto; Samrawit Gebre; Stefania Giacomello; Simon Gilroy; Stefan J. Green; Christopher E. Mason; Sigrid S. Reinsch; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Deanne M. Taylor; Jonathan M. Galazka; Raul Herranz; Masafumi Muratani,space biology; omics; metadata; standardization; ESA; JAXA; NASA; GeneLab; ISSOP; Twins study,78,"Space agencies have announced plans for human missions to the Moon to prepare for Mars. However, the space environment presents stressors that include radiation, microgravity, and isolation. Understanding how these factors affect biology is crucial for safe and effective crewed space exploration. There is a need to develop countermeasures, to adapt plants and microbes for nutrient sources and bioregenerative life support, and to limit pathogen infection. Scientists across the world are conducting space omics experiments on model organisms and, more recently, on humans. Optimal extraction of actionable scientific discoveries from these precious datasets will only occur at the collective level with improved standardization. To address this shortcoming, we established ISSOP (International Standards for Space Omics Processing), an international consortium of scientists who aim to enhance standard guidelines between space biologists at a global level. Here we introduce our consortium and share past lessons learned and future challenges related to spaceflight omics.",2020,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7733874/
PMC7828077,Knowledge Network Embedding of Transcriptomic Data from Spaceflown Mice Uncovers Signs and Symptoms Associated with Terrestrial Diseases,Charlotte A. Nelson; Ana Uriarte Acuna; Amber M. Paul; Ryan T. Scott; Atul J. Butte; Egle Cekanaviciute; Sergio E. Baranzini; Sylvain V. Costes,spaceflight; knowledge graph; transcriptomics,37,"There has long been an interest in understanding how the hazards from spaceflight may trigger or exacerbate human diseases. With the goal of advancing our knowledge on physiological changes during space travel, NASA GeneLab provides an open-source repository of multi-omics data from real and simulated spaceflight studies. Alone, this data enables identification of biological changes during spaceflight, but cannot infer how that may impact an astronaut at the phenotypic level. To bridge this gap, Scalable Precision Medicine Oriented Knowledge Engine (SPOKE), a heterogeneous knowledge graph connecting biological and clinical data from over 30 databases, was used in combination with GeneLab transcriptomic data from six studies. This integration identified critical symptoms and physiological changes incurred during spaceflight.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7828077/
PMC8044432,NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus pipeline: standardized processing of short-read RNA-seq data,Eliah G. Overbey; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; Zhe Zhang; Komal S. Rathi; Homer Fogle; Willian A. da Silveira; Richard J. Barker; Joseph J. Bass; Afshin Beheshti; Daniel C. Berrios; Elizabeth A. Blaber; Egle Cekanaviciute; Helio A. Costa; Laurence B. Davin; Kathleen M. Fisch; Samrawit G. Gebre; Matthew Geniza; Rachel Gilbert; Simon Gilroy; Gary Hardiman; Raúl Herranz; Yared H. Kidane; Colin P.S. Kruse; Michael D. Lee; Ted Liefeld; Norman G. Lewis; J. Tyson McDonald; Robert Meller; Tejaswini Mishra; Imara Y. Perera; Shayoni Ray; Sigrid S. Reinsch; Sara Brin Rosenthal; Michael Strong; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Candice G.T. Tahimic; Deanne M. Taylor; Joshua P. Vandenbrink; Alicia Villacampa; Silvio Weging; Chris Wolverton; Sarah E. Wyatt; Luis Zea; Sylvain V. Costes; Jonathan M. Galazka,Omics; Space Sciences,50,"With the development of transcriptomic technologies, we are able to quantify precise changes in gene expression profiles from astronauts and other organisms exposed to spaceflight. Members of NASA GeneLab and GeneLab-associated analysis working groups (AWGs) have developed a consensus pipeline for analyzing short-read RNA-sequencing data from spaceflight-associated experiments. The pipeline includes quality control, read trimming, mapping, and gene quantification steps, culminating in the detection of differentially expressed genes. This data analysis pipeline and the results of its execution using data submitted to GeneLab are now all publicly available through the GeneLab database. We present here the full details and rationale for the construction of this pipeline in order to promote transparency, reproducibility, and reusability of pipeline data; to provide a template for data processing of future spaceflight-relevant datasets; and to encourage cross-analysis of data from other databases with the data available in GeneLab.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8044432/
PMC11166911,Spatially resolved multiomics on the neuronal effects induced by spaceflight in mice,Yuvarani Masarapu; Egle Cekanaviciute; Zaneta Andrusivova; Jakub O. Westholm; Åsa Björklund; Robin Fallegger; Pau Badia-i-Mompel; Valery Boyko; Shubha Vasisht; Amanda Saravia-Butler; Samrawit Gebre; Enikő Lázár; Marta Graziano; Solène Frapard; Robert G. Hinshaw; Olaf Bergmann; Deanne M. Taylor; Douglas C. Wallace; Christer Sylvén; Konstantinos Meletis; Julio Saez-Rodriguez; Jonathan M. Galazka; Sylvain V. Costes; Stefania Giacomello,Molecular neuroscience; Genetics of the nervous system; Computational neuroscience,79,"Impairment of the central nervous system (CNS) poses a significant health risk for astronauts during long-duration space missions. In this study, we employed an innovative approach by integrating single-cell multiomics (transcriptomics and chromatin accessibility) with spatial transcriptomics to elucidate the impact of spaceflight on the mouse brain in female mice. Our comparative analysis between ground control and spaceflight-exposed animals revealed significant alterations in essential brain processes including neurogenesis, synaptogenesis and synaptic transmission, particularly affecting the cortex, hippocampus, striatum and neuroendocrine structures. Additionally, we observed astrocyte activation and signs of immune dysfunction. At the pathway level, some spaceflight-induced changes in the brain exhibit similarities with neurodegenerative disorders, marked by oxidative stress and protein misfolding. Our integrated spatial multiomics approach serves as a stepping stone towards understanding spaceflight-induced CNS impairments at the level of individual brain regions and cell types, and provides a basis for comparison in future spaceflight studies. For broader scientific impact, all datasets from this study are available through an interactive data portal, as well as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Open Science Data Repository (OSDR).",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166911/
PMC11167097,Biological horizons: pioneering open science in the cosmos,Sylvain V. Costes; Chelle L. Gentemann; Steven H. Platts; Lisa A. Carnell,Space physics; Cell biology; Research data,9,N/A,2024,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11167097/
PMC11094041,Inspiration4 data access through the NASA Open Science Data Repository,Lauren M. Sanders; Kirill A. Grigorev; Ryan T. Scott; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; San-huei Lai Polo; Rachel Gilbert; Eliah G. Overbey; JangKeun Kim; Christopher E. Mason; Sylvain V. Costes,Computational biology and bioinformatics; Biological techniques,11,"The increasing accessibility of commercial and private space travel necessitates a profound understanding of its impact on human health. The NASA Open Science Data Repository (OSDR) provides transparent and FAIR access to biological studies, notably the SpaceX Inspiration4 (I4) mission, which amassed extensive data from civilian astronauts. This dataset encompasses omics and clinical assays, facilitating comprehensive research on space-induced biological responses. These data allow for multi-modal, longitudinal assessments, bridging the gap between human and model organism studies. Crucially, community-driven data standards established by NASA’s OSDR Analysis Working Groups empower artificial intelligence and machine learning to glean invaluable insights, guiding future mission planning and health risk mitigation. This article presents a concise guide to access and analyze I4 data in OSDR, including programmatic access through GLOpenAPI. This pioneering effort establishes a precedent for post-mission health monitoring programs within space agencies, propelling research in the burgeoning field of commercial space travel’s impact on human physiology.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11094041/
PMC11053165,NASA GeneLab derived microarray studies of ,Konstantinos I. Adamopoulos; Lauren M. Sanders; Sylvain V. Costes,Databases; Molecular biology,67,"One of the greatest challenges of humanity for deep space exploration is to fully understand how altered gravitational conditions affect human physiology. It is evident that the spaceflight environment causes multiple alterations to musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, immune and central nervous systems, to name a few known effects. To better characterize these biological effects, we compare gene expression datasets from microarray studies found in NASA GeneLab, part of the NASA Open Science Data Repository. In this review, we summarize these archived results for various tissues, emphasizing key genes which are highly reproducible in different mice or human experiments. Such exhaustive mining shows the potential of NASA Open Science data to identify and validate mechanisms taking place when mammalian organisms are exposed to microgravity or other spaceflight conditions. Our comparative meta-analysis findings highlight certain degrees of overlap and reproducibility in genes identified as differentially expressed within musculoskeletal tissues in each species across a variety of altered gravity conditions. However, the level of overlap between species was found to be significantly limited, partly attributed to the limited availability of human samples.",2024,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11053165/
PMC11403809,Celebrating 30 years of access to NASA Space Life Sciences data,Lauren M Sanders; Danielle K Lopez; Alan E Wood; Ryan T Scott; Samrawit G Gebre; Amanda M Saravia-Butler; Sylvain V Costes,space biology; NASA; data; open science; data archive; FAIR; omics,0,"NASA’s space life sciences research programs established a decades-long legacy of enhancing our ability to safely explore the cosmos. From Skylab and the Space Shuttle Program to the NASA Balloon Program and the International Space Station National Lab, these programs generated priceless data that continue to paint a vibrant picture of life in space. These data are available to the scientific community in various data repositories, including the NASA Ames Life Sciences Data Archive (ALSDA) and NASA GeneLab. Here we recognize the 30-year anniversary of data access through ALSDA and the 10-year anniversary of GeneLab.",2024,article-commentary,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11403809/
PMC8513672,Dichotomous effects on lymphatic transport with loss of caveolae in mice,Gaurav Baranwal; Heidi A. Creed; Walter E. Cromer; Wei Wang; Bradley D. Upchurch; Matt C. Smithhart; Suman S. Vadlamani; Mary-Catherine C. Clark; Napoleon C. Busbuso; Stephanie N. Blais; Andrea J. Reyna; Ranjeet M. Dongaonkar; David C. Zawieja; Joseph M. Rutkowski,caveolin-1; lymph propulsion; lymphatic contractility; lymphatic permeability; nitric oxide,0,"Fluid and macromolecule transport from the interstitium into and through lymphatic vessels is necessary for tissue homeostasis. While lymphatic capillary structure suggests that passive, paracellular transport would be the predominate route of macromolecule entry, active caveolae-mediated transcellular transport has been identified in lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) in vitro. Caveolae also mediate a wide array of endothelial cell processes, including nitric oxide regulation. Thus, how does the lack of caveolae impact “lymphatic function”? Various aspects of lymphatic transport were measured in mice constitutively lacking caveolin-1 (“CavKO”), the protein required for caveolae formation in endothelial cells, and in mice with a LEC-specific In each model, lymphatic architecture was largely unchanged. The lymphatic conductance, or initial tissue uptake, was significantly higher in both CavKO mice and LyCav mice by quantitative microlymphangiography and the permeability to 70kDa dextran was significantly increased in monolayers of LECs isolated from CavKO mice. Conversely, transport within the lymphatic system to the sentinel node was significantly reduced in anesthetized CavKO and LyCav mice. Isolated, cannulated collecting vessel studies identified significantly reduced phasic contractility when lymphatic endothelium lacks caveolae. Inhibition of nitric oxide synthase was able to partially restore ex vivo vessel contractility. Macromolecule transport across lymphatics is increased with loss of caveolae, yet phasic contractility reduced, resulting in reduced overall lymphatic transport function. These studies identify lymphatic caveolar biology as a key regulator of active lymphatic transport functions.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8513672/
PMC11126634,Fungal diversity differences in the indoor dust microbiome from built environments on earth and in space,Nicholas Nastasi; Sarah R. Haines; Ashleigh Bope; Marit E. Meyer; John M. Horack; Karen C. Dannemiller,Environmental microbiology; Fungi,50,"Human occupied built environments are no longer confined to Earth. In fact, there have been humans living and working in low-Earth orbit on the International Space Station (ISS) since November 2000. With NASA’s",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11126634/
PMC11386075,Predicting how varying moisture conditions impact the microbiome of dust collected from the International Space Station,Nicholas Nastasi; Ashleigh Bope; Marit E. Meyer; John M. Horack; Karen C. Dannemiller,Built environment; Fungi; Spacecraft; Relative humidity; Microbiome; Space biology; Moisture; Mold,61,"The commercialization of space travel will soon lead to many more people living and working in unique built environments similar to the International Space Station, which is a specialized closed environment that contains its own indoor microbiome. Unintended microbial growth can occur in these environments as in buildings on Earth from elevated moisture, such as from a temporary ventilation system failure. This growth can drive negative health outcomes and degrade building materials. We need a predictive approach for modeling microbial growth in these critical indoor spaces. Here, we demonstrate that even short exposures to varying elevated relative humidity can facilitate rapid microbial growth and microbial community composition changes in dust from spacecraft. We modeled fungal growth in dust from the International Space Station using the time-of-wetness framework with activation and deactivation limited growth occurring at 85% and 100% relative humidity, respectively. Fungal concentrations ranged from an average of 4.4 × 10 Our results demonstrate that moisture conditions can be used to develop and predict changes in fungal growth and composition onboard human-occupied spacecraft. This predictive model can be expanded upon to include other spacecraft environmental factors such as microgravity, elevated carbon dioxide conditions, and radiation exposure. Understanding microbial growth in spacecraft can help better protect astronaut health, fortify spacecraft integrity, and promote planetary protection as human activity increases in low-Earth orbit, the moon, Mars, and beyond. Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-024-01864-3.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11386075/
PMC3502426,Aging and Estrogen Status: A Possible Endothelium-Dependent Vascular Coupling Mechanism in Bone Remodeling,Rhonda D. Prisby; James M. Dominguez; Judy Muller-Delp; Matthew R. Allen; Michael D. Delp,N/A,53,"Bone loss with aging and menopause may be linked to vascular endothelial dysfunction. The purpose of the study was to determine whether putative modifications in endothelium-dependent vasodilation of the principal nutrient artery (PNA) of the femur are associated with changes in trabecular bone volume (BV/TV) with altered estrogen status in young (6 mon) and old (24 mon) female Fischer-344 rats. Animals were divided into 6 groups: 1) young intact, 2) old intact, 3) young ovariectomized (OVX), 4) old OVX, 5) young OVX plus estrogen replacement (OVX+E2), and 6) old OVX+E2. PNA endothelium-dependent vasodilation was assessed",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3502426/
PMC3856860,Chronic Skeletal Unloading of the Rat Femur: Mechanisms and Functional Consequences of Vascular Remodeling,John N. Stabley; Rhonda D. Prisby; Bradley J. Behnke; Michael D. Delp,Bone Blood Flow; Hindlimb Unloading; Vascular Resistance,0,"Chronic skeletal unloading diminishes hindlimb bone blood flow. The purpose of the present investigation was to determine 1) whether 7 and 14 days of skeletal unloading alters femoral bone and marrow blood flow and vascular resistance during reloading, and 2) whether putative changes in bone perfusion are associated with a gross structural remodeling of the principal nutrient artery (PNA) of the femur. Six-month old male Sprague-Dawley rats were assigned to 7-d or 14-d hindlimb unloading (HU) or weight-bearing control groups. Bone perfusion was measured following 10 min of standing (reloading) following the unloading treatment. Histomorphometry was used to determine PNA media wall thickness and maximal diameter. Bone blood flow, arterial pressure and PNA structural characteristics were used to calculate arterial shear stress and circumferential wall stress. During reloading, femoral perfusion was lower in the distal metaphyseal region of 7-d HU rats, and in the proximal and distal metaphyses, diaphysis and diaphyseal marrow of 14-d HU animals relative to that in control rats. Vascular resistance was also higher in all regions of the femur in 14-d HU rats during reloading relative to control animals. Intraluminal diameter of PNAs from 14-d HU rats (138 ± 5 μm) was smaller than that of control PNAs (162 ± 6 μm), and medial wall thickness was thinner in PNAs from 14-d HU (14.3 ± 0.6 μm) versus that of control (18.0 ± 0.8 μm) rats. Decreases in both shear stress and circumferential stress occurred in the PNA with HU that later returned to control levels with the reductions in PNA maximal diameter and wall thickness, respectively. The results demonstrate that chronic skeletal unloading attenuates the ability to increase blood flow and nutrient delivery to bone and marrow with immediate acute reloading due, in part, to a remodeling of the bone resistance vasculature.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3856860/
PMC3615599,Differential effects of aging and exercise on intra-abdominal adipose arteriolar function and blood flow regulation,Robert T. Davis; John N. Stabley; James M. Dominguez; Michael W. Ramsey; Danielle J. McCullough; Lisa A. Lesniewski; Michael D. Delp; Brad J. Behnke,aging; adipose tissue; blood flow; α-adrenergic vasoconstriction; exercise,0,"Adipose tissue (AT), which typically comprises an increased percentage of body mass with advancing age, receives a large proportion of resting cardiac output. During exercise, an old age-associated inability to increase vascular resistance within the intra-abdominal AT may compromise the ability of the cardiovascular system to redistribute blood flow to the active musculature, contributing to the decline in exercise capacity observed in this population. We tested the hypotheses that",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3615599/
PMC4050424,Effects of spaceflight and ground recovery on mesenteric artery and vein constrictor properties in mice,Bradley J. Behnke; John N. Stabley; Danielle J. McCullough; Robert T. Davis; James M. Dominguez; Judy M. Muller-Delp; Michael D. Delp,orthostatic hypotension; microgravity; microcirculation,0,"Following exposure to microgravity, there is a reduced ability of astronauts to augment peripheral vascular resistance, often resulting in orthostatic hypotension. The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that mesenteric arteries and veins will exhibit diminished vasoconstrictor responses after spaceflight. Mesenteric arteries and veins from female mice flown on the Space Transportation System (STS)-131 (",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4050424/
PMC3659353,"Spaceflight-induced alterations in cerebral artery vasoconstrictor, mechanical, and structural properties: implications for elevated cerebral perfusion and intracranial pressure",Curtis R. Taylor; Mina Hanna; Bradley J. Behnke; John N. Stabley; Danielle J. McCullough; Robert T. Davis; Payal Ghosh; Anthony Papadopoulos; Judy M. Muller-Delp; Michael D. Delp,microgravity; brain blood flow; hemodynamics,0,"Evidence indicates that cerebral blood flow is both increased and diminished in astronauts on return to Earth. Data from ground-based animal models simulating the effects of microgravity have shown that decrements in cerebral perfusion are associated with enhanced vasoconstriction and structural remodeling of cerebral arteries. Based on these results, the purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that 13 d of spaceflight [Space Transportation System (STS)-135 shuttle mission] enhances myogenic vasoconstriction, increases medial wall thickness, and elicits no change in the mechanical properties of mouse cerebral arteries. Basilar and posterior communicating arteries (PCAs) were isolated from 9-wk-old female C57BL/6 mice for",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3659353/
PMC4169763,Exercise Training Augments Regional Bone and Marrow Blood Flow during Exercise,John N. Stabley; Natasha C. Moningka; Bradley J. Behnke; Michael D. Delp,skeletal blood flow; vascular resistance; bone hemodynamics; microcirculation,0,"The principal nutrient artery to the femur demonstrates an increase in nitric oxide mediated vasodilation in rats after treadmill exercise training. The present study sought to determine whether exercise training improves hindlimb bone and marrow blood flow distribution at rest and during exercise. Six-eight month old male Sprague-Dawley rats were exercise trained (ET) with treadmill walking at 15 m/min up a 15° incline for 60 min/d over a 10–12 wk period. Sedentary (SED) control animals were acclimated to treadmill exercise for 5 min/d during the week preceding the blood flow measurements. Blood flow to nine distinct regions of the femur, tibia, and fibula were determined at rest and during low-intensity exercise (15 m/min walking, 0° incline) using the reference sample microsphere method. The results demonstrate an augmentation of exercise hyperemia above that observed in SED rats during exercise in only one region of bone, the femoral diaphysis of ET rats. However, while exercise hyperemia occurred in 3 of the 9 hindlimb bone regions measured in SED rats, exercise hyperemia occurred in 7 of 9 regions in ET rats. These data indicate an increase in generalized hindlimb bone and marrow blood flow during physical activity following a period of exercise training. Elevations in regional bone and marrow blood flow after training may augment medullary pressure and bone interstitial fluid flow, thus benefiting bone integrity.",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4169763/
PMC4398884,Effects of skeletal unloading on the vasomotor properties of the rat femur principal nutrient artery,Rhonda D. Prisby; Bradley J. Behnke; Matthew R. Allen; Michael D. Delp,hindlimb unloading; bone blood flow; microcirculation,0,"Spaceflight and prolonged bed rest induce deconditioning of the cardiovascular system and bone loss. Previous research has shown declines in femoral bone and marrow perfusion during unloading and with subsequent reloading in hindlimb-unloaded (HU) rats, an animal model of chronic disuse. We hypothesized that the attenuated bone and marrow perfusion may result from altered vasomotor properties of the bone resistance vasculature. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine the effects of unloading on the vasoconstrictor and vasodilator properties of the femoral principal nutrient artery (PNA), the main conduit for blood flow to the femur, in 2 wk HU and control (CON) rats. Vasoconstriction of the femoral PNA was assessed in vitro using norepinephrine, phenylephrine, clonidine, KCl, endothelin-1, arginine vasopressin, and myogenic responsiveness. Vasodilation through endothelium-dependent [acetylcholine, bradykinin, and flow-mediated dilation (FMD)] and endothelium-independent mechanisms [sodium nitroprusside (SNP) and adenosine] were also determined. Vasoconstrictor responsiveness of the PNA from HU rats was not enhanced through any of the mechanisms tested. Endothelium-dependent vasodilation to acetylcholine (CON, 86 ± 3%; HU, 48 ± 7% vasodilation) and FMD (CON, 61 ± 9%; HU, 11 ± 11% vasodilation) were attenuated in PNAs from HU rats, while responses to bradykinin were not different between groups. Endothelium-independent vasodilation to SNP and adenosine were not different between groups. These data indicate that unloading-induced decrements in bone and marrow perfusion and increases in vascular resistance are not the result of enhanced vasoconstrictor responsiveness of the bone resistance arteries but are associated with reductions in endothelium-dependent vasodilation.",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4398884/
PMC4379453,Type 2 diabetes alters bone and marrow blood flow and vascular control mechanisms in the ZDF rat,John N. Stabley; Rhonda D. Prisby; Bradley J. Behnke; Michael D. Delp,Diabetes; Bone blood flow; Endothelium; Vascular conductance; Zucker diabetic fatty rat,0,"Bone health and cardiovascular function are compromised in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The purpose of the present study was to determine whether skeletal vascular control mechanisms are altered during the progression of T2DM in the Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) rat. Responses of the principal nutrient artery (PNA) of the femur from obese ZDF rats with prediabetes, short-term diabetes, and long-term diabetes to endothelium-dependent (acetylcholine) and –independent (sodium nitroprusside) vasodilation, and KCl, norepinephrine and myogenic vasoconstrictor were determined",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4379453/
PMC4385880,Spaceflight on the Bion-M1 biosatellite alters cerebral artery vasomotor and mechanical properties in mice,Svetlana I. Sofronova; Olga S. Tarasova; Dina Gaynullina; Anna A. Borzykh; Bradley J. Behnke; John N. Stabley; Danielle J. McCullough; Joshua J. Maraj; Mina Hanna; Judy M. Muller-Delp; Olga L. Vinogradova; Michael D. Delp,microgravity; vasoconstriction; endothelium-dependent vasodilation; brain blood flow,0,"Conditions during spaceflight, such as the loss of the head-to-foot gravity vector, are thought to potentially alter cerebral blood flow and vascular resistance. The purpose of the present study was to determine the effects of long-term spaceflight on the functional, mechanical, and structural properties of cerebral arteries. Male C57BL/6N mice were flown 30 days in a Bion-M1 biosatellite. Basilar arteries isolated from spaceflight (SF) (",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4385880/
PMC4964660,Apollo Lunar Astronauts Show Higher Cardiovascular Disease Mortality: Possible Deep Space Radiation Effects on the Vascular Endothelium,Michael D. Delp; Jacqueline M. Charvat; Charles L. Limoli; Ruth K. Globus; Payal Ghosh,N/A,43,"As multiple spacefaring nations contemplate extended manned missions to Mars and the Moon, health risks could be elevated as travel goes beyond the Earth’s protective magnetosphere into the more intense deep space radiation environment. The primary purpose of this study was to determine whether mortality rates due to cardiovascular disease (CVD), cancer, accidents and all other causes of death differ in (1) astronauts who never flew orbital missions in space, (2) astronauts who flew only in low Earth orbit (LEO), and (3) Apollo lunar astronauts, the only humans to have traveled beyond Earth’s magnetosphere. Results show there were no differences in CVD mortality rate between non-flight (9%) and LEO (11%) astronauts. However, the CVD mortality rate among Apollo lunar astronauts (43%) was 4–5 times higher than in non-flight and LEO astronauts. To test a possible mechanistic basis for these findings, a secondary purpose was to determine the long-term effects of simulated weightlessness and space-relevant total-body irradiation on vascular responsiveness in mice. The results demonstrate that space-relevant irradiation induces a sustained vascular endothelial cell dysfunction. Such impairment is known to lead to occlusive artery disease, and may be an important risk factor for CVD among astronauts exposed to deep space radiation.",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4964660/
PMC5866446,Effects of age and exercise training on coronary microvascular smooth muscle phenotype and function,Judy M. Muller-Delp; Kazuki Hotta; Bei Chen; Bradley J. Behnke; Joshua J. Maraj; Michael D. Delp; Tiffani R. Lucero; Jeremy A. Bramy; David B. Alarcon; Hannah E. Morgan; Morgan R. Cowan; Anthony D. Haynes,adiponectin; contractile phenotype; secretory phenotype; vascular smooth muscle; vasoconstriction,0,"Coronary microvascular function and blood flow responses during acute exercise are impaired in the aged heart but can be restored by exercise training. Coronary microvascular resistance is directly dependent on vascular smooth muscle function in coronary resistance arterioles; therefore, we hypothesized that age impairs contractile function and alters the phenotype of vascular smooth muscle in coronary arterioles. We further hypothesized that exercise training restores contractile function and reverses age-induced phenotypic alterations of arteriolar smooth muscle. Young and old Fischer 344 rats underwent 10 wk of treadmill exercise training or remained sedentary. At the end of training or cage confinement, contractile responses, vascular smooth muscle proliferation, and expression of contractile proteins were assessed in isolated coronary arterioles. Both receptor- and non-receptor-mediated contractile function were impaired in coronary arterioles from aged rats. Vascular smooth muscle shifted from a differentiated, contractile phenotype to a secretory phenotype with associated proliferation of smooth muscle in the arteriolar wall. Expression of smooth muscle myosin heavy chain 1 (SM1) was decreased in arterioles from aged rats, whereas expression of phospho-histone H3 and of the synthetic protein ribosomal protein S6 (rpS6) were increased. Exercise training improved contractile responses, reduced smooth muscle proliferation and expression of rpS6, and increased expression of SM1 in arterioles from old rats. Thus age-induced contractile dysfunction of coronary arterioles and emergence of a secretory smooth muscle phenotype may contribute to impaired coronary blood flow responses, but arteriolar contractile responsiveness and a younger smooth muscle phenotype can be restored with late-life exercise training.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5866446/
PMC6165321,Impact of Spaceflight and Artificial Gravity on the Mouse Retina: Biochemical and Proteomic Analysis,Xiao W. Mao; Stephanie Byrum; Nina C. Nishiyama; Michael J. Pecaut; Vijayalakshmi Sridharan; Marjan Boerma; Alan J. Tackett; Dai Shiba; Masaki Shirakawa; Satoru Takahashi; Michael D. Delp,spaceflight; ocular tissue; microgravity; artificial gravity; apoptosis; proteomics; oxidative stress,25,"Astronauts are reported to have experienced some impairment in visual acuity during their mission on the International Space Station (ISS) and after they returned to Earth. There is emerging evidence that changes in vision may involve alterations in ocular structure and function. To investigate possible mechanisms, changes in protein expression profiles and oxidative stress-associated apoptosis were examined in mouse ocular tissue after spaceflight. Nine-week-old male C57BL/6 mice (",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6165321/
PMC7339929,Simulated Microgravity Induces Regionally Distinct Neurovascular and Structural Remodeling of Skeletal Muscle and Cutaneous Arteries in the Rat,Olga S. Tarasova; Vjatcheslav U. Kalenchuk; Anatoly S. Borovik; Veronika O. Golubinskaya; Michael D. Delp; Olga L. Vinogradova,microgravity; hindlimb unloading; rat; small arteries; remodeling; sympathetic innervation; noradrenaline; serotonin,45,,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7339929/
PMC8220224,Spaceflight decelerates the epigenetic clock orchestrated with a global alteration in DNA methylome and transcriptome in the mouse retina,Zhong Chen; Seta Stanbouly; Nina C Nishiyama; Xin Chen; Michael D Delp; Hongyu Qiu; Xiao W Mao; Charles Wang,spaceflight; DNA methylome; transcriptome; epigenetic clock,51,"Astronauts exhibit an assortment of clinical abnormalities in their eyes during long-duration spaceflight. The purpose of this study was to determine whether spaceflight induces epigenomic and transcriptomic reprogramming in the retina or alters the epigenetic clock. The mice were flown for 37 days in animal enclosure modules on the International Space Station; ground-based control animals were maintained under similar housing conditions. Mouse retinas were isolated and both DNA methylome and transcriptome were determined by deep sequencing. We found that a large number of genes were differentially methylated with spaceflight, whereas there were fewer differentially expressed genes at the transcriptome level. Several biological pathways involved in retinal diseases such as macular degeneration were significantly altered. Our results indicated that spaceflight decelerated the retinal epigenetic clock. This study demonstrates that spaceflight impacts the retina at the epigenomic and transcriptomic levels, and such changes could be involved in the etiology of eye-related disorders among astronauts.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8220224/
PMC2910419,DEVELOPMENT OF OTOLITH RECEPTORS IN JAPANESE QUAIL,David Huss; Rena Navaluri; Kathleen F. Faulkner; J. David Dickman,Vestibular; motion detection; spatial orientation; gravity perception,0,"The present study examined the morphological development of the otolith vestibular receptors in quail. Here we describe epithelial growth, hair cell density, stereocilia polarization, and afferent nerve innervation during development. The otolith maculae epithelial areas increased exponentially throughout embryonic development reaching asymptotic values near post-hatch day P7. Increases in hair cell density were dependent upon macular location; striolar hair cells developed first followed by hair cells in extrastriola regions. Stereocilia polarization was initiated early, with defining reversal zones forming at E8. Less than half of all immature hair cells observed had non-polarized internal kinocilia with the remaining exhibiting planar polarity. Immunohistochemistry and neural tracing techniques were employed to examine the shape and location of the striolar regions. Initial innervation of the maculae was by small fibers with terminal growth cones at E6, followed by collateral branches with apparent bouton terminals at E8. Calyceal terminal formation began at E10, however no mature calyces were observed until E12, when all fibers appeared to be dimorphs. Calyx afferents innervating only type I hair cells did not develop until E14. Finally, the topographic organization of afferent macular innervation in the adult quail utricle was quantified. Calyx and dimorph afferents were primarily confined to the striolar regions, while bouton fibers were located in the extrastriola and type II band. Calyx fibers were the least complex, followed by dimorph units. Bouton fibers had large innervation fields, with arborous branches and many terminal boutons.",2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2910419/
PMC3166430,Spatial and temporal characteristics of vestibular convergence,Kimberly L. McArthur; Mridha Zakir; Asim Haque; J. David Dickman,vestibular; sensory convergence; brainstem,0,"In all species studied, afferents from semicircular canals and otolith organs converge on central neurons in the brainstem. However, the spatial and temporal relationships between converging inputs and how these contribute to vestibular behaviors is not well understood. In the current study, we used discrete rotational and translational motion stimuli to characterize canal- and otolith-driven response components of convergent non-eye movement (NEM) neurons in the vestibular nuclear complex of alert pigeons. When compared to afferent responses, convergent canal signals had similar gain and phase ranges but exhibited greater spatial variability in their axes of preferred rotation. Convergent otolith signals also had similar mean gain and phase values to the afferent population but were spatially well-matched with the corresponding canal signals, cell-by-cell. However, neither response component alone nor a simple linear combination of these components was sufficient to predict actual net responses during combined canal-otolith stimulation. We discuss these findings in the context of previous studies of pigeon vestibular behaviors, and we compare our findings to similar studies in other species.",2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3166430/
PMC6615562,The Ca,Chike Cao; Aaron B. Oswald; Brian A. Fabella; Yinshi Ren; Ramona Rodriguiz; George Trainor; Matthew B. Greenblatt; Matthew J. Hilton; Geoffrey S. Pitt,Ca; Ca; osteoprotegerin; otosclerosis; osteoclast,0,"Bone remodeling of the auditory ossicles and the otic capsule is highly restricted and tightly controlled by the osteoprotegerin (OPG) / receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL) / receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B (RANK) system. In these bony structures, a pathological decrease in OPG expression stimulates osteoclast differentiation and excessive resorption followed by accrual of sclerotic bone, ultimately resulting in the development of otosclerosis, a leading cause of deafness in adults. Understanding the signaling pathways involved in maintaining OPG expression in the ear would shed light on the pathophysiology of otosclerosis and other ear bone-related diseases. We and others previously demonstrated that Ca",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6615562/
PMC7324008,SIMULATED MICROGRAVITY ENHANCES OLIGODENDROCYTE MITOCHONDRIAL FUNCTION AND LIPID METABOLISM,Araceli Espinosa-Jeffrey; Kevin Nguyen; Shalini Kumar; Ochiai Toshimasa; Ryuji Hirose; Karen Reue; Laurent Vergnes; Jason Kinchen; Jean de Vellis,Oligodendrocytes; myelination; simulated microgravity; lipid metabolism; energy metabolism; mitochondrial function,0,"The primary energy sources of mammalian cells are proteins, fats and sugars that are processed by well-known biochemical mechanisms that have been discovered and studied in 1G (terrestrial gravity). Here we sought to determine how simulated microgravity (sim-μG) impacts both energy and lipid metabolism in oligodendrocytes (OLs), the myelin forming cells in the central nervous system. We report increased mitochondrial respiration and increased glycolysis 24 hours after exposure to sim-μG. Moreover, examination of the secretome after three days exposure of OLs to sim-μG confirmed increased the Krebs cycle (",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7324008/
PMC8412175,Human Neural Stem Cells Flown into Space Proliferate and Generate Young Neurons,Carlos Cepeda; Laurent Vergnes; Nicholas Carpo; Matthew J. Schibler; Laurent A. Bentolila; Fathi Karouia; Araceli Espinosa-Jeffrey,neural stem cells; pluripotency; space flight; microgravity; proliferation; neuronal specification; neurons; energetics; glycolysis,11,"Here we demonstrate that human neural stem cells (NSCs) proliferate while in space and they express specific NSC markers after being in space. NSCs displayed both higher oxygen consumption and glycolysis than ground controls. These cells also kept their ability to become young neurons. Electrophysiological recordings of space NSC-derived neurons showed immature cell membrane properties characterized by small capacitance and very high input resistance. Current injections elicited only an incipient action potential. No spontaneous synaptic events could be detected, suggesting their immature status even though most recorded cells displayed complex morphology and numerous cell processes. Ascertaining the origin of the NSCs′ increased energy requirement is of the essence in order to design effective measures to minimize health risks associated with long-duration human spaceflight missions.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8412175/
PMC10607959,Correction: Tran et al. Delayed Maturation of Oligodendrocyte Progenitors by Microgravity: Implications for Multiple Sclerosis and Space Flight. ,Victoria Tran; Nicholas Carpo; Sophia Shaka; Joile Zamudio; Sungshin Choi; Carlos Cepeda; Araceli Espinosa-Jeffrey,N/A,1,N/A,2023,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10607959/
PMC9699585,Space Microgravity Alters Neural Stem Cell Division: Implications for Brain Cancer Research on Earth and in Space,Sophia Shaka; Nicolas Carpo; Victoria Tran; Carlos Cepeda; Araceli Espinosa-Jeffrey,human neural stem cells; abnormal cell division; cytokinesis; gravitational research; brain; microgravity; space flight,39,"Considering the imminence of long-term space travel, it is necessary to investigate the impact of space microgravity (SPC-µG) in order to determine if this environment has consequences on the astronauts’ health, in particular, neural and cognitive functions. Neural stem cells (NSCs) are the basis for the regeneration of the central nervous system (CNS) cell populations and learning how weightlessness impacts NSCs in health and disease provides a critical tool for the potential mitigation of specific mechanisms leading to neurological disorders. In previous studies, we found that exposure to SPC-µG resulted in enhanced proliferation, a shortened cell cycle, and a larger cell diameter of NSCs compared to control cells. Here, we report the frequent occurrence of abnormal cell division (ACD) including incomplete cell division (ICD), where cytokinesis is not successfully completed, and multi-daughter cell division (MDCD) of NSCs following SPC-µG as well as secretome exposure compared to ground control (1G) NSCs. These findings provide new insights into the potential health implications of space travel and have far-reaching implications for understanding the mechanisms leading to the deleterious effects of long-term space travel as well as potential carcinogenic susceptibility. Knowledge of these mechanisms could help to develop preventive or corrective measures for successful long-term SPC-µG exposure.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9699585/
PMC9953055,Oligodendrocyte Progenitors Display Enhanced Proliferation and Autophagy after Space Flight,Victoria Tran; Nicholas Carpo; Carlos Cepeda; Araceli Espinosa-Jeffrey,space flight; oligodendrocyte progenitors; autophagy; proliferation; visual impairment intracranial pressure; intracranial hypertension; SPARC; HSP-90,23,"Intracranial hypertension (ICP) and visual impairment intracranial pressure (VIIP) are some of the consequences of long-term space missions. Here we examined the behavior of oligodendrocyte progenitors (OLPs) after space flight using time-lapse microscopy. We show that most OLPs divided more than ground control (GC) counterparts did. Nonetheless, a subpopulation of OLPs flown to space presented a significant increase in autophagic cell death. Examination of the proteomic profile of the secretome of space flown OLPs (SPC-OLPs) revealed that the stress protein heat shock protein-90 beta “HSP-90β” was the 5",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9953055/
PMC10528075,Metabolomics Profile of the Secretome of Space-Flown Oligodendrocytes,Laurent Vergnes; Bernard Foucaud; Carlos Cepeda; Araceli Espinosa-Jeffrey,microgravity; oligodendrocyte progenitors; global metabolomics; oligodendrocyte progenitor energetics,49,"Intracranial hypertension (ICP) and visual impairment intracranial pressure (VIIP) are some of the sequels of long-term space missions. Here we sought to determine how space microgravity (µG) impacts the metabolomics profile of oligodendrocyte progenitors (OLPs), the myelin-forming cells in the central nervous system. We report increased glutamate and energy metabolism while the OLPs were in space for 26 days. We also show that after space flight, OLPs (SPC OLPs) display significantly increased mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis. These data are in agreement with our previous work using simulated microgravity. In addition, our global metabolomics approach allowed for the discovery of endogenous metabolites secreted by OLPs while in space that are significantly modulated by microgravity. Our results provide, for the first time, relevant information about the energetic state of OLPs while in space and after space flight. The functional and molecular relevance of these specific pathways are promising targets for therapeutic intervention for humans in long-term space missions to the moon, Mars and beyond.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10528075/
PMC10813126,Metabolomic Profiling of the Secretome from Human Neural Stem Cells Flown into Space,Juan Carlos Biancotti; Araceli Espinosa-Jeffrey,microgravity; neural stem cells; secretome; spaceflight; metabolomics; cell metabolism,35,"The change in gravitational force has a significant effect on biological tissues and the entire organism. As with any alteration in the environment, microgravity (µG) produces modifications in the system inducing adaptation to the new condition. In this study, we analyzed the effect of µG on neural stem cells (NSCs) following a space flight to the International Space Station (ISS). After 3 days in space, analysis of the metabolome in culture medium revealed increased glycolysis with augmented pyruvate and glycerate levels, and activated catabolism of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) and glutamine. NSCs flown into space (SPC-NSCs) also showed increased synthesis of NADH and formation of polyamine spermidine when compared to ground controls (GC-NSCs). Overall, the space environment appears to increase energy demands in response to the µG setting.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10813126/
PMC10390562,Paving the way to better understand the effects of prolonged spaceflight on operational performance and its neural bases,A. C. Stahn; D. Bucher; P. zu Eulenburg; P. Denise; N. Smith; F. Pagnini; O. White,Neuroscience; Human behaviour,106,"Space exploration objectives will soon move from low Earth orbit to distant destinations like Moon and Mars. The present work provides an up-to-date roadmap that identifies critical research gaps related to human behavior and performance in altered gravity and space. The roadmap summarizes (1) key neurobehavioral challenges associated with spaceflight, (2) the need to consider sex as a biological variable, (3) the use of integrative omics technologies to elucidate mechanisms underlying changes in the brain and behavior, and (4) the importance of understanding the neural representation of gravity throughout the brain and its multisensory processing. We then highlight the need for a variety of target-specific countermeasures, and a personalized administration schedule as two critical strategies for mitigating potentially adverse effects of spaceflight on the central nervous system and performance. We conclude with a summary of key priorities for the roadmaps of current and future space programs and stress the importance of new collaborative strategies across agencies and researchers for fostering an integrative cross- and transdisciplinary approach from cells, molecules to neural circuits and cognitive performance. Finally, we highlight that space research in neurocognitive science goes beyond monitoring and mitigating risks in astronauts but could also have significant benefits for the population on Earth.",2023,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10390562/
PMC4290804,Spaceflight Induces Specific Alterations in the Proteomes of Arabidopsis,Robert J. Ferl; Jin Koh; Fiona Denison; Anna-Lisa Paul,N/A,0,"Life in spaceflight demonstrates remarkable acclimation processes within the specialized habitats of vehicles subjected to the myriad of unique environmental issues associated with orbital trajectories. To examine the response processes that occur in plants in space, leaves and roots from Arabidopsis (",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4290804/
PMC5515520,The effect of spaceflight on the gravity-sensing auxin gradient of roots: GFP reporter gene microscopy on orbit,Robert J Ferl; Anna-Lisa Paul,N/A,44,"Our primary aim was to determine whether gravity has a direct role in establishing the auxin-mediated gravity-sensing system in primary roots. Major plant architectures have long been thought to be guided by gravity, including the directional growth of the primary root via auxin gradients that are then disturbed when roots deviate from the vertical as a gravity sensor. However, experiments on the International Space Station (ISS) now allow physical clarity with regard to any assumptions regarding the role of gravity in establishing fundamental root auxin distributions. We examined the spaceflight green fluorescent protein (GFP)-reporter gene expression in roots of transgenic lines of",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5515520/
PMC5286820,Skewing in Arabidopsis roots involves disparate environmental signaling pathways,Eric R. Schultz; Agata K. Zupanska; Natasha J. Sng; Anna-Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl,Transcriptomics; Root skewing; Root waving; Morphometrics; Microarray,119,"Skewing root patterns provide key insights into root growth strategies and mechanisms that produce root architectures. Roots exhibit skewing and waving when grown on a tilted, impenetrable surface. The genetics guiding these morphologies have been examined, revealing that some Arabidopsis ecotypes skew and wave (e.g. WS), while others skew insignificantly but still wave (e.g. Col-0). The underlying molecular mechanisms of skewing and waving remain unclear. In this study, transcriptome data were derived from two Arabidopsis ecotypes, WS and Col-0, under three tilted growth conditions in order to identify candidate genes involved in skewing. This work identifies a number of genes that are likely involved in skewing, using growth conditions that differentially affect skewing and waving. Comparing the gene expression profiles of WS and Col-0 in different tilted growth conditions identified 11 candidate genes as potentially involved in the control of skewing. These 11 genes are involved in several different cellular processes, including sugar transport, salt signaling, cell wall organization, and hormone signaling. This study identified 11 genes whose change in expression level is associated with root skewing behavior. These genes are involved in signaling and perception, rather than the physical restructuring of root. Future work is needed to elucidate the potential role of these candidate genes during root skewing. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12870-017-0975-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5286820/
PMC5470433,"Data for characterization of SALK_084889, a T-DNA insertion line of ",Mingqi Zhou; Anna-Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl,Arabidopsis; DREB2A; LOX1; SALK_084889; T-DNA,5,"In this article we report the identification of T-DNA (transfer DNA) insertion sites within two different gene regions in the genome of an Arabidopsis mutant line, SALK_084889. The T-DNA positions are in the 3′ UTR (untranslated region) of DREB2A (Dehydration-responsive element-binding protein 2A) (",2017,other,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5470433/
PMC5491145,Genetic dissection of the Arabidopsis spaceflight transcriptome: Are some responses dispensable for the physiological adaptation of plants to spaceflight?,Anna-Lisa Paul; Natasha J. Sng; Agata K. Zupanska; Aparna Krishnamurthy; Eric R. Schultz; Robert J. Ferl,N/A,68,"Experimentation on the International Space Station has reached the stage where repeated and nuanced transcriptome studies are beginning to illuminate the structural and metabolic differences between plants grown in space compared to plants on the Earth. Genes that are important in establishing the spaceflight responses are being identified, their roles in spaceflight physiological adaptation are increasingly understood, and the fact that different genotypes adapt differently is recognized. However, the basic question of whether these spaceflight responses are actually required for survival has yet to be posed, and the fundamental notion that spaceflight responses may be non-adaptive has yet to be explored. Therefore the experiments presented here were designed to ask if portions of the plant spaceflight response can be genetically removed without causing loss of spaceflight survival and without causing increased stress responses. The CARA experiment compared the spaceflight transcriptome responses in the root tips of two Arabidopsis ecotypes, Col-0 and WS, as well as that of a PhyD mutant of Col-0. When grown with the ambient light of the ISS,",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5491145/
PMC5996828,Phenotypic characterization of an Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion line SALK_063500,Natasha J. Sng; Anna-Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl,Arabidopsis; T-DNA; SALK_063500; Silique; Pollen; Phenotype; AT1G05290,6,In this article we report the identification of a homozygous lethal T-DNA (transfer DNA) line within the coding region of the At1G05290 gene in the genome,2018,other,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5996828/
PMC6201722,Utilization of single‐image normalized difference vegetation index (,Nicole S. Beisel; Jordan B. Callaham; Natasha J. Sng; Dylan J. Taylor; Anna‐Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl,early stress detection; imaging; plant health monitoring; vegetation index,8,"An imaging system was refined to monitor the health of vegetation grown in controlled conditions using spectral reflectance patterns. To measure plant health, the single‐image normalized difference vegetation index ( The Stress was detected in",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6201722/
PMC6240453,Comparing ,Aparna Krishnamurthy; Robert J. Ferl; Anna‐Lisa Paul,differential expression; microarray; root apex; transcriptome,44,"The root apex is an important region involved in environmental sensing, but comprises a very small part of the root. Obtaining root apex transcriptomes is therefore challenging when the samples are limited. The feasibility of using tiny root sections for transcriptome analysis was examined, comparing Both microarrays and Single root tip subsections can be used for transcriptome analysis using either",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6240453/
PMC6447593,Spaceflight-induced alternative splicing during seedling development in ,Nicole S. Beisel; Jerald Noble; W. Brad Barbazuk; Anna-Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl,N/A,24,"Plants grown in spaceflight experience novel environmental signals, including those associated with microgravity and ionizing radiation. Spaceflight triggers a response involving transcriptional re-programming and altered cell morphology, though many aspects of this response remain uncharacterized. We analyzed the spaceflight-induced transcriptome with a focus on genes that undergo alternative splicing to examine differential splicing associated with spaceflight—an unstudied characteristic of the molecular response to spaceflight exposure. RNA sequence data obtained during the APEX03 spaceflight experiment that was collected from two",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6447593/
PMC7264257,Biomass Production of the EDEN ISS Space Greenhouse in Antarctica During the 2018 Experiment Phase,Paul Zabel; Conrad Zeidler; Vincent Vrakking; Markus Dorn; Daniel Schubert,bio-regenerative life support system (BLSS); plant cultivation chamber; space plant growth facility; space food and nutrition; space analog studies; controlled environment agriculture (CEA),31,"The EDEN ISS greenhouse is a space-analog test facility near the German Neumayer III station in Antarctica. The facility is part of the project of the same name and was designed and built starting from March 2015 and eventually deployed in Antarctica in January 2018. The nominal operation of the greenhouse started on February 7th and continued until the 20th of November. The purpose of the facility is to enable multidisciplinary research on topics related to future plant cultivation on human space exploration missions. Research on food quality and safety, plant health monitoring, microbiology, system validation, human factors and horticultural sciences was conducted. Part of the latter is the determination of the biomass production of the different crops. The data on this topic is presented in this paper. During the first season 26 different crops were grown on the 12.5 m",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7264257/
PMC7064724,Root Skewing-Associated Genes Impact the Spaceflight Response of ,Brandon Califar; Natasha J. Sng; Agata Zupanska; Anna-Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl,spaceflight; root; skewing; transcriptomics; abiotic stress; acclimation; physiological adaptation,130,"The observation that plant roots skew in microgravity recently refuted the long-held conviction that skewing was a gravity-dependent phenomenon. Further, spaceflight root skewing suggests that specific root morphologies and cell wall remodeling systems may be important aspects of spaceflight physiological adaptation. However, connections between skewing, cell wall modification and spaceflight physiology are currently based on inferences rather than direct tests. Therefore, the Advanced Plant Experiments-03-2 (APEX-03-2) spaceflight study was designed to elucidate the contribution of two skewing- and cell wall-associated genes in Arabidopsis to root behavior and gene expression patterns in spaceflight, to assess whether interruptions of different skewing pathways affect the overall spaceflight-associated process. SPIRAL1 is a skewing-related protein implicated in directional cell expansion, and functions by regulating cortical microtubule dynamics. SKU5 is skewing-related glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein of the plasma membrane and cell wall implicated in stress response signaling. These two genes function in different cellular pathways that affect skewing on the Earth, and enable a test of the relevance of skewing pathways to spaceflight physiological adaptation. In this study, both",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7064724/
PMC6379395,Articular cartilage and sternal fibrocartilage respond differently to extended microgravity,Jamie Fitzgerald; Jamie Endicott; Uwe Hansen; Cathleen Janowitz,N/A,25,"The effects of spaceflight on cartilaginous structure are largely unknown. To address this deficiency, articular cartilage (AC) and sternal cartilage (SC) from mice exposed to 30 days of microgravity on the BION-M1 craft were investigated for pathological changes. The flight AC showed some evidence of degradation at the tissue level with loss of proteoglycan staining and a reduction in mRNA expression of mechano-responsive and structural cartilage matrix proteins compared to non-flight controls. These data suggest that degradative changes are underway in the AC extracellular matrix exposed to microgravity. In contrast, there was no evidence of cartilage breakdown in SC flight samples and the gene expression profile was distinct from that of AC with a reduction in metalloproteinase gene transcription. Since the two cartilages respond differently to microgravity we propose that each is tuned to the biomechanical environments in which they are normally maintained. That is, the differences between magnitude of normal terrestrial loading and the unloading of microgravity dictates the tissue response. Weight-bearing articular cartilage, but not minimally loaded sternal fibrocartilage, is negatively affected by the unloading of microgravity. We speculate that the maintenance of physiological loading on AC during spaceflight will minimize AC damage.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6379395/
PMC4187166,Host-Microbe Interactions in Microgravity: Assessment and Implications,Jamie S. Foster; Raymond M. Wheeler; Regine Pamphile,host-microbe interactions; microgravity; microbiome; space flight,107,"Spaceflight imposes several unique stresses on biological life that together can have a profound impact on the homeostasis between eukaryotes and their associated microbes. One such stressor, microgravity, has been shown to alter host-microbe interactions at the genetic and physiological levels. Recent sequencing of the microbiomes associated with plants and animals have shown that these interactions are essential for maintaining host health through the regulation of several metabolic and immune responses. Disruptions to various environmental parameters or community characteristics may impact the resiliency of the microbiome, thus potentially driving host-microbe associations towards disease. In this review, we discuss our current understanding of host-microbe interactions in microgravity and assess the impact of this unique environmental stress on the normal physiological and genetic responses of both pathogenic and mutualistic associations. As humans move beyond our biosphere and undergo longer duration space flights, it will be essential to more fully understand microbial fitness in microgravity conditions in order to maintain a healthy homeostasis between humans, plants and their respective microbiomes.",2014,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4187166/
PMC5219934,Environmental cues and symbiont microbe-associated molecular patterns function in concert to drive the daily remodelling of the crypt-cell brush border of the ,Elizabeth A.C. Heath-Heckman; Jamie Foster; Michael A. Apicella; William E. Goldman; Margaret McFall-Ngai,N/A,0,"Recent research has shown that the microbiota affects the biology of associated host epithelial tissues, including their circadian rhythms, although few data are available on how such influences shape the microarchitecture of the brush border. The squid-vibrio system exhibits two modifications of the brush border that supports the symbionts: effacement and repolarization. Together these occur on a daily rhythm in adult animals, at the dawn expulsion of symbionts into the environment, and symbiont colonization of the juvenile host induces an increase in microvillar density. Here we sought to define how these processes are related and the roles of both symbiont colonization and environmental cues. Ultrastructural analyses showed that the juvenile-organ brush borders also efface concomitantly with daily dawn-cued expulsion of symbionts. Manipulation of the environmental light cue and juvenile symbiotic state demonstrated that this behaviour requires the light cue, but not colonization. In contrast, symbionts were required for the observed increase in microvillar density that accompanies post dawn brush-border repolarization; this increase was induced solely by host exposure to phosphorylated lipid A of symbiont cells. These data demonstrate that a partnering of environmental and symbiont cues shapes the brush border and that microbe-associated molecular patterns play a role in the regulation of brush-border microarchitecture.",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5219934/
PMC6386654,Symbiotic organs shaped by distinct modes of genome evolution in cephalopods,Mahdi Belcaid; Giorgio Casaburi; Sarah J. McAnulty; Hannah Schmidbaur; Andrea M. Suria; Silvia Moriano-Gutierrez; M. Sabrina Pankey; Todd H. Oakley; Natacha Kremer; Eric J. Koch; Andrew J. Collins; Hoan Nguyen; Sai Lek; Irina Goncharenko-Foster; Patrick Minx; Erica Sodergren; George Weinstock; Daniel S. Rokhsar; Margaret McFall-Ngai; Oleg Simakov; Jamie S. Foster; Spencer V. Nyholm,cephalopods; symbiosis; evolution; genomics; transcriptomics,35,"Animal–microbe associations are critical drivers of evolutionary innovation, yet the origin of specialized symbiotic organs remains largely unexplored. We analyzed the genome of",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6386654/
PMC7940393,Modeled microgravity alters lipopolysaccharide and outer membrane vesicle production of the beneficial symbiont ,Madeline M. Vroom; Yaneli Rodriguez-Ocasio; Jonathan B. Lynch; Edward G. Ruby; Jamie S. Foster,Microbiology; Zoology,88,"Reduced gravity, or microgravity, can have a pronounced impact on the physiology of animals, but the effects on their associated microbiomes are not well understood. Here, the impact of modeled microgravity on the shedding of Gram-negative lipopolysaccharides (LPS) by the symbiotic bacterium",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7940393/
PMC9023564,Emergence of novel cephalopod gene regulation and expression through large-scale genome reorganization,Hannah Schmidbaur; Akane Kawaguchi; Tereza Clarence; Xiao Fu; Oi Pui Hoang; Bob Zimmermann; Elena A. Ritschard; Anton Weissenbacher; Jamie S. Foster; Spencer V. Nyholm; Paul A. Bates; Caroline B. Albertin; Elly Tanaka; Oleg Simakov,Evolutionary developmental biology; Evolutionary genetics; Molecular evolution,54,"Coleoid cephalopods (squid, cuttlefish, octopus) have the largest nervous system among invertebrates that together with many lineage-specific morphological traits enables complex behaviors. The genomic basis underlying these innovations remains unknown. Using comparative and functional genomics in the model squid",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9023564/
PMC9389742,Modeled microgravity alters apoptotic gene expression and caspase activity in the squid-vibrio symbiosis,Madeline M. Vroom; Angel Troncoso-Garcia; Alexandrea A. Duscher; Jamie S. Foster,Symbiosis; Apoptosis; Caspases; Microgravity,78,"Spaceflight is a novel and profoundly stressful environment for life. One aspect of spaceflight, microgravity, has been shown to perturb animal physiology thereby posing numerous health risks, including dysregulation of normal developmental pathways. Microgravity can also negatively impact the interactions between animals and their microbiomes. However, the effects of microgravity on developmental processes influenced by beneficial microbes, such as apoptosis, remains poorly understood. Here, the binary mutualism between the bobtail squid, Analysis of the host genome and transcriptome revealed a complex network of apoptosis genes affiliated with extrinsic/receptor-mediated and intrinsic/stress-induced apoptosis. Expression of apoptosis genes under modeled microgravity conditions occurred earlier and at high levels compared to gravity controls, in particular the expression of genes encoding initiator and executioner caspases. Functional assays of these apoptotic proteases revealed heightened activity under modeled microgravity; however, these increases could be mitigated using caspase inhibitors. The outcomes of this study indicated that modeled microgravity alters the expression of both extrinsic and intrinsic apoptosis gene expression and that this process is mediated in part by caspases. Modeled microgravity-associated increases of caspase activity can be pharmacologically inhibited suggesting that perturbations to the normal apoptosis signaling cascade can be mitigated, which may have broader implications for maintaining animal-microbial homeostasis in spaceflight. The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12866-022-02614-x.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9389742/
PMC2824534,,P.K. Valonen; F.T. Moutos; A. Kusanagi; M. Moretti; B.O. Diekman; J.F. Welter; A.I. Caplan; F. Guilak; L.E. Freed,Cartilage repair; stem cell; bioreactor; biomechanics; growth factors,0,Three-dimensionally woven poly(ε-caprolactone)(PCL) scaffolds were combined with adult human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) to engineer mechanically functional cartilage constructs,2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2824534/
PMC2991213,Chondrogenesis and Mineralization During ,Christoffer K. Abrahamsson; Fan Yang; Hyoungshin Park; Jonathan M. Brunger; Piia K. Valonen; Robert Langer; Jean F. Welter; Arnold I. Caplan; Farshid Guilak; Lisa E. Freed,N/A,0,Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) and three-dimensional (3D) woven poly(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL) scaffolds are promising tools for skeletal tissue engineering. We hypothesized that,2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2991213/
PMC8269219,"Correction for Vangay et al., “Microbiome Metadata Standards: Report of the National Microbiome Data Collaborative’s Workshop and Follow-On Activities”",Pajau Vangay; Josephine Burgin; Anjanette Johnston; Kristen L. Beck; Daniel C. Berrios; Kai Blumberg; Shane Canon; Patrick Chain; John-Marc Chandonia; Danielle Christianson; Sylvain V. Costes; Joan Damerow; William D. Duncan; Jose Pablo Dundore-Arias; Kjiersten Fagnan; Jonathan M. Galazka; Sean M. Gibbons; David Hays; Judson Hervey; Bin Hu; Bonnie L. Hurwitz; Pankaj Jaiswal; Marcin P. Joachimiak; Linda Kinkel; Joshua Ladau; Stanton L. Martin; Lee Ann McCue; Kayd Miller; Nigel Mouncey; Chris Mungall; Evangelos Pafilis; T. B. K. Reddy; Lorna Richardson; Simon Roux; Lynn M. Schriml; Justin P. Shaffer; Jagadish Chandrabose Sundaramurthi; Luke R. Thompson; Ruth E. Timme; Jie Zheng; Elisha M. Wood-Charlson; Emiley A. Eloe-Fadrosh,N/A,0,N/A,2021,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8269219/
PMC11362537,Spaceflight alters host-gut microbiota interactions,E. Gonzalez; M. D. Lee; B. T. Tierney; N. Lipieta; P. Flores; M. Mishra; L. Beckett; A. Finkelstein; A. Mo; P. Walton; F. Karouia; R. Barker; R. J. Jansen; S. J. Green; S. Weging; J. Kelliher; N. K. Singh; D. Bezdan; J. Galazska; N. J. B. Brereton,Microbial communities; Microbial genetics; Metagenomics; Microbiota,185,"The ISS rodent habitat has provided crucial insights into the impact of spaceflight on mammals, inducing symptoms characteristic of liver disease, insulin resistance, osteopenia, and myopathy. Although these physiological responses can involve the microbiome on Earth, host-microbiota interactions during spaceflight are still being elucidated. We explore murine gut microbiota and host gene expression in the colon and liver after 29 and 56 days of spaceflight using multiomics. Metagenomics revealed significant changes in 44 microbiome species, including relative reductions in bile acid and butyrate metabolising bacteria like",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11362537/
PMC9111996,Asparagine biosynthesis as a mechanism of increased host lethality induced by ,Rachel Gilbert; Nicole Tanenbaum; Sharmila Bhattacharya,Low shear modeled microgravity; Asparagine; Virulence,50,"While studies have shown an increase in pathogenicity in several microbes during spaceflight and after exposure to simulated microgravity, the mechanisms underlying these changes in phenotype are not understood across different pathogens, particularly in opportunistic pathogens. This study evaluates the mechanism for increased virulence of the opportunistic gram-negative bacterium,",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9111996/
PMC10308117,Comparative genomic analysis of ,Anna C. Simpson; V. V. Ramprasad Eedara; Nitin K. Singh; Namita Damle; Ceth W. Parker; Fathi Karouia; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,International Space Station (ISS); novel bacteria; space biology; pangenome analysis,89,A single strain from the family,2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10308117/
PMC10233975,Characterization of metagenome-assembled genomes from the International Space Station,Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Jose Patane; Livia Maria Silva Moura; Jonathan Lombardino; João Carlos Setubal; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,Metagenome-assembled genomes; Genome-inferred phenotype; Microgravity; ISS,51,"Several investigations on the microbial diversity and functional properties of the International Space Station (ISS) environment were carried out to understand the influence of spaceflight conditions on the microbial population. However, metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) of ISS samples are yet to be generated and subjected to various genomic analyses, including phylogenetic affiliation, predicted functional pathways, antimicrobial resistance, and virulence characteristics. In total, 46 MAGs were assembled from 21 ISS environmental metagenomes, in which metaSPAdes yielded 20 MAGs and metaWRAP generated 26 MAGs. Among 46 MAGs retrieved, 18 bacterial species were identified, including one novel genus/species combination ( Comparative analyses of MAGs and whole-genome sequences of related ISS isolates and their type strains were characterized to understand the variation related to the microbial evolution under microgravity. The Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-023-01545-7.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10233975/
PMC10848226,Biocontrol in built environments to reduce pathogen exposure and infection risk,Neil R Gottel; Megan S Hill; Maxwell J Neal; Sarah M Allard; Karsten Zengler; Jack A Gilbert,indoor microbiome; biocontrol; probiotic cleaning; bacillus; antibiotic resistance; built environment; AMR; metabolic modelling,111,"The microbiome of the built environment comprises bacterial, archaeal, fungal, and viral communities associated with human-made structures. Even though most of these microbes are benign, antibiotic-resistant pathogens can colonize and emerge indoors, creating infection risk through surface transmission or inhalation. Several studies have catalogued the microbial composition and ecology in different built environment types. These have informed",2024,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10848226/
PMC3329368,Release of extracellular purines from plant roots and effect on ion fluxes,Adeeba Dark; Vadim Demidchik; Siân L. Richards; Sergey Shabala; Julia M. Davies,abscisic acid; ADP; ATP; calcium; channel; glutamate; root,0,"Extracellular purine nucleotides appear capable of regulating plant development, defence and stress responses by acting in part as agonists of plasma membrane calcium channels. Factors stimulating ATP release include wounding, osmotic stress and elicitors. Here we show that exogenous abscisic acid and L-glutamate can also cause ATP accumulation around",2011,article-commentary,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3329368/
PMC12008199,Mechanosensing antagonizes ethylene signaling to promote root gravitropism in rice,Han-Qing Wang; Xing-Yu Zhao; Zhong Tang; Xin-Yuan Huang; Peng Wang; Wenhua Zhang; Yunhui Zhang; Sheng Luan; Fang-Jie Zhao,Plant signalling; Tropism; Plant hormones,71,"Root gravitropism relies on gravity perception by the root cap and requires tightly regulated phytohormone signaling. Here, we isolate a rice mutant that displays root coiling in hydroponics but normal gravitropic growth in soil. We identify",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12008199/
PMC12008199,Mechanosensing antagonizes ethylene signaling to promote root gravitropism in rice,Han-Qing Wang; Xing-Yu Zhao; Zhong Tang; Xin-Yuan Huang; Peng Wang; Wenhua Zhang; Yunhui Zhang; Sheng Luan; Fang-Jie Zhao,Plant signalling; Tropism; Plant hormones,71,"Root gravitropism relies on gravity perception by the root cap and requires tightly regulated phytohormone signaling. Here, we isolate a rice mutant that displays root coiling in hydroponics but normal gravitropic growth in soil. We identify",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12008199/
PMC4035928,Salt stress-induced Ca,Won-Gyu Choi; Masatsugu Toyota; Su-Hwa Kim; Richard Hilleary; Simon Gilroy,Ca; Yellow Cameleon; Two Pore Channel 1,0,"This work documents a previously unreported plant-wide signaling system based on the rapid, long-distance transmission of Ca",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4035928/
PMC12008199,Mechanosensing antagonizes ethylene signaling to promote root gravitropism in rice,Han-Qing Wang; Xing-Yu Zhao; Zhong Tang; Xin-Yuan Huang; Peng Wang; Wenhua Zhang; Yunhui Zhang; Sheng Luan; Fang-Jie Zhao,Plant signalling; Tropism; Plant hormones,71,"Root gravitropism relies on gravity perception by the root cap and requires tightly regulated phytohormone signaling. Here, we isolate a rice mutant that displays root coiling in hydroponics but normal gravitropic growth in soil. We identify",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12008199/
PMC5181587,Wortmannin-induced vacuole fusion enhances amyloplast dynamics in Arabidopsis ,Ashley Ann Alvarez; Sang Won Han; Masatsugu Toyota; Carla Brillada; Jiameng Zheng; Simon Gilroy; Marcela Rojas-Pierce,Amyloplasts; cytoskeleton; gravitropism; SNARE; vacuole; wortmannin.,52,The highly restricted movement of amyloplasts in graviperceptive cells of,2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5181587/
PMC4936552,A ROS-Assisted Calcium Wave Dependent on the AtRBOHD NADPH Oxidase and TPC1 Cation Channel Propagates the Systemic Response to Salt Stress,Matthew J. Evans; Won-Gyu Choi; Simon Gilroy; Richard J. Morris,N/A,0,Mathematical modeling coupled with direct measurement of Ca,2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4936552/
PMC7610290,Vascular Bundles Mediate Systemic Reactive Oxygen Signaling during Light Stress,Sara I. Zandalinas; Yosef Fichman; Ron Mittler,N/A,0,The reactive oxygen species wave propagates through vascular bundles during the systemic response of Arabidopsis (,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7610290/
PMC5614317,Real-time ,Thomas R. Vincent; James Canham; Masatsugu Toyota; Marieta Avramova; Sam T. Mugford; Simon Gilroy; Anthony J. Miller; Saskia Hogenhout; Dale Sanders,Biochemistry; Issue 126; Calcium; aphid; GCaMP; microscopy; insect; GFP,50,"Calcium ions are predicted to be key signaling entities during biotic interactions, with calcium signaling forming an established part of the plant defense response to microbial elicitors and to wounding caused by chewing insects, eliciting systemic calcium signals in plants. However, the role of calcium",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5614317/
PMC5677518,Orchestrating rapid long-distance signaling in plants with Ca,Won-Gyu Choi; Gad Miller; Ian Wallace; Jeffrey Harper; Ron Mittler; Simon Gilroy,calcium; cell-to-cell communication; plasmodesmata; reactive oxygen species; systemic signaling,0,"Plants show a rapid systemic response to a wide range of environmental stresses, where the signals from the site of stimulus perception are transmitted to distal organs to elicit plant-wide responses. A wide range of signaling molecules are trafficked through the plant, but a trio of potentially interacting messengers, reactive oxygen species (ROS), Ca",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5677518/
PMC11850895,"Glutathione triggers leaf-to-leaf, calcium-based plant defense signaling",Rui Li; Yongfang Yang; Hao Lou; Weicheng Wang; Ran Du; Haidong Chen; Xiaoxi Du; Shuai Hu; Guo-Liang Wang; Jianbin Yan; Xiaoyi Shan; Daoxin Xie,Herbivory; Biotic; Wounding,62,"Animals rely on nervous systems to cope with environmental variability, whereas plants are characterized by lack of nervous system but still have evolved systemic communication systems through signaling molecules that trigger long-distance defense signaling events when encountered with environmental challenges. Here, our genetic screening of the previously constructed hairpin RNA-based",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11850895/
PMC7076552,Test of ,Richard Barker; Jonathan Lombardino; Kai Rasmussen; Simon Gilroy,spaceflight; transcriptomics; RNAseq; microarray; proteomics; bioinformatics; Qlik,77,"Recent advances in the routine access to space along with increasing opportunities to perform plant growth experiments on board the International Space Station have led to an ever-increasing body of transcriptomic, proteomic, and epigenomic data from plants experiencing spaceflight. These datasets hold great promise to help understand how plant biology reacts to this unique environment. However, analyses that mine across such expanses of data are often complex to implement, being impeded by the sheer number of potential comparisons that are possible. Complexities in how the output of these multiple parallel analyses can be presented to the researcher in an accessible and intuitive form provides further barriers to such research. Recent developments in computational systems biology have led to rapid advances in interactive data visualization environments designed to perform just such tasks. However, to date none of these tools have been tailored to the analysis of the broad-ranging plant biology spaceflight data. We have therefore developed the Test Of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome (TOAST) database (",2020,methods-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7076552/
PMC7414185,Tonoplast-localized Ca,Richard Hilleary; Julio Paez-Valencia; Cullen Vens; Masatsugu Toyota; Michael Palmgren; Simon Gilroy,autoinhibited calcium ATPase; calcium; flg22; vacuole,62,Ca,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7414185/
PMC8133610,The fast and the furious: rapid long-range signaling in plants,Sarah Johns; Takuma Hagihara; Masatsugu Toyota; Simon Gilroy,N/A,0,"Plants possess a systemic signaling system whereby local stimuli can lead to rapid, plant-wide responses. In addition to the redistribution of chemical messengers that range from RNAs and peptides to hormones and metabolites, a communication system acting through the transmission of electrical, Ca2+, reactive oxygen species and potentially even hydraulic signals has also been discovered. This latter system can propagate signals across many cells each second and researchers are now beginning to uncover the molecular machineries behind this rapid communications network. Thus, elements such as the reactive oxygen species producing NAPDH oxidases and ion channels of the two pore channel, glutamate receptor-like and cyclic nucleotide gated families are all required for the rapid propagation of these signals. Upon arrival at their distant targets, these changes trigger responses ranging from the production of hormones, to changes in the levels of primary metabolites and shifts in patterns of gene expression. These systemic responses occur within seconds to minutes of perception of the initial, local signal, allowing for the rapid deployment of plant-wide responses. For example, an insect starting to chew on just a single leaf triggers preemptive antiherbivore defenses throughout the plant well before it has a chance to move on to the next leaf on its menu.",2021,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8133610/
PMC8113475,Rad-Bio-App: a discovery environment for biologists to explore spaceflight-related radiation exposures,Richard Barker; Sylvain V. Costes; Jack Miller; Samrawit G. Gebre; Jonathan Lombardino; Simon Gilroy,Databases; Physiology; Plant sciences; Microbiology; Molecular biology,51,"In addition to microgravity, spaceflight simultaneously exposes biology to a suite of other stimuli. For example, in space, organisms experience ionizing radiation environments that significantly differ in both quality and quantity from those normally experienced on Earth. However, data on radiation exposure during space missions is often complex to access and to understand, limiting progress towards defining how radiation affects organisms against the unique background of spaceflight. To help address this challenge, we have developed the Rad-Bio-App. This web-accessible database imports radiation metadata from experiments archived in NASA’s GeneLab data repository, and then allows the user to explore these experiments both in the context of their radiation exposure and through their other metadata and results. Rad-Bio-App provides an easy-to-use, graphically-driven environment to enable both radiation biologists and non-specialist researchers to visualize, and understand the impact of ionizing radiation on various biological systems in the context of spaceflight.",2021,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8113475/
PMC9706465,The vacuolar H,Jian Yang; Iny Elizebeth Mathew; Hormat Rhein; Richard Barker; Qi Guo; Luca Brunello; Elena Loreti; Bronwyn J Barkla; Simon Gilroy; Pierdomenico Perata; Kendal D Hirschi,N/A,0,"A plant’s oxygen supply can vary from normal (normoxia) to total depletion (anoxia). Tolerance to anoxia is relevant to wetland species, rice (",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9706465/
PMC10027818,Meta-analysis of the space flight and microgravity response of the Arabidopsis plant transcriptome,Richard Barker; Colin P. S. Kruse; Christina Johnson; Amanda Saravia-Butler; Homer Fogle; Hyun-Seok Chang; Ralph Møller Trane; Noah Kinscherf; Alicia Villacampa; Aránzazu Manzano; Raúl Herranz; Laurence B. Davin; Norman G. Lewis; Imara Perera; Chris Wolverton; Parul Gupta; Pankaj Jaiswal; Sigrid S. Reinsch; Sarah Wyatt; Simon Gilroy,Plant sciences; Genetic databases,59,"Spaceflight presents a multifaceted environment for plants, combining the effects on growth of many stressors and factors including altered gravity, the influence of experiment hardware, and increased radiation exposure. To help understand the plant response to this complex suite of factors this study compared transcriptomic analysis of 15",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10027818/
PMC3337602,"Low-Dose, Ionizing Radiation and Age-Related Changes in Skeletal Microarchitecture",Joshua S. Alwood; Akhilesh Kumar; Luan H. Tran; Angela Wang; Charles L. Limoli; Ruth K. Globus,N/A,25,"Osteoporosis can profoundly affect the aged as a consequence of progressive bone loss; high-dose ionizing radiation can cause similar changes, although less is known about lower doses (≤100 cGy). We hypothesized that exposure to relatively low doses of gamma radiation accelerates structural changes characteristic of skeletal aging. Mice (C57BL/6J-10 wk old, male) were irradiated (total body; 0-sham, 1, 10 or 100 cGy",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3337602/
PMC4490751,Ionizing Radiation Stimulates Expression of Pro-Osteoclastogenic Genes in Marrow and Skeletal Tissue,Joshua S. Alwood; Mohammad Shahnazari; Betsabel Chicana; A.S. Schreurs; Akhilesh Kumar; Alana Bartolini; Yasaman Shirazi-Fard; Ruth K. Globus,N/A,46,"Exposure to ionizing radiation can cause rapid mineral loss and increase bone-resorbing osteoclasts within metabolically active, cancellous bone tissue leading to structural deficits. To better understand mechanisms involved in rapid, radiation-induced bone loss, we determined the influence of total body irradiation on expression of select cytokines known both to stimulate osteoclastogenesis and contribute to inflammatory bone disease. Adult (16 week), male C57BL/6J mice were exposed to either 2 Gy gamma rays (",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4490751/
PMC5132293,Preservation of Multiple Mammalian Tissues to Maximize Science Return from Ground Based and Spaceflight Experiments,Sungshin Choi; Hami E. Ray; San-Huei Lai; Joshua S. Alwood; Ruth K. Globus,N/A,27,"Even with recent scientific advancements, challenges posed by limited resources and capabilities at the time of sample dissection continue to limit the collection of high quality tissues from experiments that can be conducted only infrequently and at high cost, such as in space. The resources and time it takes to harvest tissues post-euthanasia, and the methods and duration of long duration storage, potentially have negative impacts on sample quantity and quality, thereby limiting the scientific outcome that can be achieved. The goals of this study were to optimize methods for both sample recovery and science return from rodent experiments, with possible relevance to both ground based and spaceflight studies. The first objective was to determine the impacts of tissue harvest time post-euthanasia, preservation methods, and storage duration, focusing on RNA quality and enzyme activities in liver and spleen as indices of sample quality. The second objective was to develop methods that will maximize science return by dissecting multiple tissues after long duration storage Tissues of C57Bl/6J mice were dissected and preserved at various time points post-euthanasia and stored at -80°C for up to 11 months. In some experiments, tissues were recovered from frozen carcasses which had been stored at -80°C up to 7 months. RNA quantity and quality was assessed by measuring RNA Integrity Number (RIN) values using an Agilent Bioanalyzer. Additionally, the quality of tissues was assessed by measuring activities of hepatic enzymes (catalase, glutathione reductase and GAPDH). Fresh tissues were collected up to one hour post-euthanasia, and stored up to 11 months at -80°C, with minimal adverse effects on the RNA quality of either livers or RNAlater-preserved spleens. Liver enzyme activities were similar to those of positive controls, with no significant effect observed at any time point. Tissues dissected from frozen carcasses that had been stored for up to 7 months at -80°C had variable results, depending on the specific tissue analyzed. RNA quality of liver, heart, and kidneys were minimally affected after 6–7 months of storage at -80°C, whereas RNA degradation was evident in tissues such as small intestine, bone, and bone marrow when they were collected from the carcasses frozen for 2.5 months. These results demonstrate that 1) the protocols developed for spaceflight experiments with on-orbit dissections support the retrieval of high quality samples for RNA expression and some protein analyses, despite delayed preservation post-euthanasia or prolonged storage, and 2) many additional tissues for gene expression analysis can be obtained by dissection even following prolonged storage of the tissue",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5132293/
PMC11747068,Single-cell RNA sequencing of the carotid artery and femoral artery of rats exposed to hindlimb unloading,Chengfei Li; Yikai Pan; Yuan Wang; Xi Li; Yateng Tie; Shuhan Li; Ruonan Wang; Xingcheng Zhao; Jieyi Fan; Xianchun Yan; Yongchun Wang; Xiqing Sun,Single-cell RNA sequencing; Weightlessness; Carotid artery; Femoral artery; Cellular communication; Transcription factor,67,"Prolonged spaceflight is known to cause vascular deconditioning and remodeling. Tail suspension, a widely used spaceflight analog, is reported to result in vascular remodeling of rats. However, little is known about the cellular atlas of the heterogeneous cells of CA and FA from hindlimb-unloaded rats. Firstly, we leveraged scRNA-seq to perform clustering analysis to identify diverse cell populations and sub-clusters within CA and FA from rats subjected to 3 months of hindlimb unloading. The dysregulated genes specific for artery types and cell types in HU group compared to Con were unraveled. Then R package “Cellchat” was used to reveal ligand-receptor cellular communication. At last, the TF network analysis was performed using the SCENIC R package to predict the pivotal TFs in rat artery remodeling induced by hindlimb unloading. Clustering analysis identified ECs, SMCs, fibroblasts, and a spectrum of immune cells, as well as neuronal and stem cells. Notably, an increased percentage of ECs in the CA and a diminished proportion of SMCs in both CA and FA were observed following tail suspension. Intersection of dysregulated genes specific for artery type and cell type after tail suspension revealed several gene sets involved in ECM remodeling, inflammation, vasoconstriction, etc. Fibroblasts, in particular, exhibited the most significant gene expression variability, highlighting their plasticity. Subclustering within ECs, SMCs and fibroblasts revealed specialized subsets engaged in processes such as EndoMT and cell cycle checkpoint regulation. Additionally, enhanced intercellular interactions among major cell types, especially between SMC and fibroblast, underscored the importance of cell communication in vascular remodeling. Several TFs were identified as potentially influential in the vascular remodeling process under simulated microgravity conditions. This study presents the first cellular atlas of the conductive arteries in hindlimb-unloaded rats, revealing a spectrum of dysregulated gene profiles. The identification of the subclusters of ECs, SMCs and fibroblasts, cellular communication analysis and transcription factors prediction are also included in this work. The findings provide a reference for future research on vascular deconditioning following long-duration spaceflight. The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00018-024-05572-x.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11747068/
PMC5666834,Redox Signaling and Its Impact on Skeletal and Vascular Responses to Spaceflight,Candice G. T. Tahimic; Ruth K. Globus,spaceflight; bone; vasculature; oxidative stress; microgravity; hindlimb unloading; radiation; reactive oxygen species; antioxidant,156,"Spaceflight entails exposure to numerous environmental challenges with the potential to contribute to both musculoskeletal and vascular dysfunction. The purpose of this review is to describe current understanding of microgravity and radiation impacts on the mammalian skeleton and associated vasculature at the level of the whole organism. Recent experiments from spaceflight and ground-based models have provided fresh insights into how these environmental stresses influence mechanisms that are related to redox signaling, oxidative stress, and tissue dysfunction. Emerging mechanistic knowledge on cellular defenses to radiation and other environmental stressors, including microgravity, are useful for both screening and developing interventions against spaceflight-induced deficits in bone and vascular function.",2017,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5666834/
PMC6753329,Influence of Social Isolation During Prolonged Simulated Weightlessness by Hindlimb Unloading,Candice G. T. Tahimic; Amber M. Paul; Ann-Sofie Schreurs; Samantha M. Torres; Linda Rubinstein; Sonette Steczina; Moniece Lowe; Sharmila Bhattacharya; Joshua S. Alwood; April E. Ronca; Ruth K. Globus,hindlimb unloading; microgravity model; bone loss; muscle atrophy; immune system; spaceflight; social isolation; HPA axis,104,"The hindlimb unloading (HU) model has been used extensively to simulate the cephalad fluid shift and musculoskeletal disuse observed in spaceflight with its application expanding to study immune, cardiovascular and central nervous system responses, among others. Most HU studies are performed with singly housed animals, although social isolation also can substantially impact behavior and physiology, and therefore may confound HU experimental results. Other HU variants that allow for paired housing have been developed although no systematic assessment has been made to understand the effects of social isolation on HU outcomes. Hence, we aimed to determine the contribution of social isolation to tissue responses to HU. To accomplish this, we developed a refinement to the traditional NASA Ames single housing HU system to accommodate social housing in pairs, retaining desirable features of the original design. We conducted a 30-day HU experiment with adult, female mice that were either singly or socially housed. HU animals in both single and social housing displayed expected musculoskeletal deficits versus housing matched, normally loaded (NL) controls. However, select immune and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis responses were differentially impacted by the HU social environment relative to matched NL controls. HU led to a reduction in % CD4",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6753329/
PMC7012842,Validation of a New Rodent Experimental System to Investigate Consequences of Long Duration Space Habitation,Sungshin Y. Choi; Amanda Saravia-Butler; Yasaman Shirazi-Fard; Dennis Leveson-Gower; Louis S. Stodieck; Samuel M. Cadena; Janet Beegle; Stephanie Solis; April Ronca; Ruth K. Globus,Microarray analysis; Ageing; Homeostasis; Translational research,69,"Animal models are useful for exploring the health consequences of prolonged spaceflight. Capabilities were developed to perform experiments in low earth orbit with on-board sample recovery, thereby avoiding complications caused by return to Earth. For NASA’s Rodent Research-1 mission, female mice (ten 32 wk C57BL/6NTac; ten 16 wk C57BL/6J) were launched on an unmanned vehicle, then resided on the International Space Station for 21/22d or 37d in microgravity. Mice were euthanized on-orbit, livers and spleens dissected, and remaining tissues frozen",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7012842/
PMC4405755,The role of alterations in mitochondrial dynamics and PGC-1α over-expression in fast muscle atrophy following hindlimb unloading,Jessica Cannavino; Lorenza Brocca; Marco Sandri; Bruno Grassi; Roberto Bottinelli; Maria Antonietta Pellegrino,N/A,0,"The mechanisms triggering disuse muscle atrophy remain of debate. It is becoming evident that mitochondrial dysfunction may regulate pathways controlling muscle mass. We have recently shown that mitochondrial dysfunction plays a major role in disuse atrophy of soleus, a slow, oxidative muscle. Here we tested the hypothesis that hindlimb unloading-induced atrophy could be due to mitochondrial dysfunction in fast muscles too, notwithstanding their much lower mitochondrial content. Gastrocnemius displayed atrophy following both 3 and 7 days of unloading. SOD1 and catalase up-regulation, no H",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4405755/
PMC8260663,Overexpression of catalase in mitochondria mitigates changes in hippocampal cytokine expression following simulated microgravity and isolation,Linda Rubinstein; Ann-Sofie Schreurs; Samantha M. Torres; Sonette Steczina; Moniece G. Lowe; Frederico Kiffer; Antiño R. Allen; April E. Ronca; Marianne B. Sowa; Ruth K. Globus; Candice G. T. Tahimic,Interleukins; Physiology,78,"Isolation on Earth can alter physiology and signaling of organs systems, including the central nervous system. Although not in complete solitude, astronauts operate in an isolated environment during spaceflight. In this study, we determined the effects of isolation and simulated microgravity solely or combined, on the inflammatory cytokine milieu of the hippocampus. Adult female wild-type mice underwent simulated microgravity by hindlimb unloading for 30 days in single or social (paired) housing. In hippocampus, simulated microgravity and isolation each regulate a discrete repertoire of cytokines associated with inflammation. Their combined effects are not additive. A model for mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) quenching via targeted overexpression of the human catalase gene to the mitochondria (MCAT mice), are protected from isolation- and/or simulated microgravity-induced changes in cytokine expression. These findings suggest a key role for mitochondrial ROS signaling in neuroinflammatory responses to spaceflight and prolonged bedrest, isolation, and confinement on Earth.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8260663/
PMC4647464,An extensive allelic series of ,Ching-Jung Lin; Peter Smibert; Xiaoyu Zhao; Jennifer F. Hu; Johnny Ramroop; Stefanie M. Kellner; Matthew A. Benton; Shubha Govind; Peter C. Dedon; Rolf Sternglanz; Eric C. Lai,t6A,53,N/A,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4647464/
PMC5659752,"Novel organelles with elements of bacterial and eukaryotic secretion
systems weaponize parasites of ",Mary Heavner; Johnny Ramroop; Gwenaelle Gueguen; Girish Ramrattan; Georgia Dolios; Michael Scarpati; Jonathan Kwiat; Sharmila Bhattacharya; Rong Wang; Shaneen Singh; Shubha Govind,Drosophila; immune suppression; hemocytes; parasitoid wasps; venom; virus-like particles; secretion systems; T3 secretion system; proteomics; mixed strategy extracellular vesicles,0,"The evolutionary success of parasitoid wasps, a highly diverse group of insects widely used in biocontrol, depends on a variety of life history strategies in conflict with those of their hosts [",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5659752/
PMC6372189,A combined computational strategy of sequence and structural analysis predicts the existence of a functional eicosanoid pathway in ,Michael Scarpati; Yan Qi; Shubha Govind; Shaneen Singh,N/A,121,This study reports on a putative eicosanoid biosynthesis pathway in,2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6372189/
PMC6945029,Immune Suppressive Extracellular Vesicle Proteins of ,Brian Wey; Mary Ellen Heavner; Kameron T. Wittmeyer; Thomas Briese; Keith R. Hopper; Shubha Govind,Extracellular vesicle; whole genome sequencing; endoparasitoid wasp; VLP; host-parasite; organelle; immune suppression,96,N/A,2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6945029/
PMC7000411,Spaceflight and simulated microgravity conditions increase virulence of ,Rachel Gilbert; Medaya Torres; Rachel Clemens; Shannon Hateley; Ravikumar Hosamani; William Wade; Sharmila Bhattacharya,Infection; Innate immunity; Microbiology,69,"While it has been shown that astronauts suffer immune disorders after spaceflight, the underlying causes are still poorly understood and there are many variables to consider when investigating the immune system in a complex environment. Additionally, there is growing evidence that suggests that not only is the immune system being altered, but the pathogens that infect the host are significantly influenced by spaceflight and ground-based spaceflight conditions. In this study, we demonstrate that",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7000411/
PMC8191917,A parasitoid wasp of ,Johnny R. Ramroop; Mary Ellen Heavner; Zubaidul H. Razzak; Shubha Govind,N/A,94,The wasps,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8191917/
PMC9865768,In Silico Analysis of a ,Joseph Arguelles; Jenny Lee; Lady V. Cardenas; Shubha Govind; Shaneen Singh,host–parasite; cysteine knot; knottin fold; Cation–Polar–Cation clip; antimicrobial peptide; heparin-binding motif; miniproteins,111,"As generalist parasitoid wasps,",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9865768/
PMC10797188,,Jennifer Chou; Johnny R. Ramroop; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; Brian Wey; Matthew P. Lera; Medaya L. Torres; Mary Ellen Heavner; Janani Iyer; Siddhita D. Mhatre; Sharmila Bhattacharya; Shubha Govind,Parasitology; Biological sciences; Entomology,81,While fruit flies (,2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10797188/
PMC10797188,,Jennifer Chou; Johnny R. Ramroop; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; Brian Wey; Matthew P. Lera; Medaya L. Torres; Mary Ellen Heavner; Janani Iyer; Siddhita D. Mhatre; Sharmila Bhattacharya; Shubha Govind,Parasitology; Biological sciences; Entomology,81,While fruit flies (,2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10797188/
PMC7555395,Simultaneous Exposure of Cultured Human Lymphoblastic Cells to Simulated Microgravity and Radiation Increases Chromosome Aberrations,Sakuya Yamanouchi; Jordan Rhone; Jian-Hua Mao; Keigi Fujiwara; Premkumar B. Saganti; Akihisa Takahashi; Megumi Hada,lymphoblast; microgravity; space radiation; chromosome aberration,60,"During space travel, humans are continuously exposed to two major environmental stresses, microgravity (μ",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7555395/
PMC4309212,Genes Required for Survival in Microgravity Revealed by Genome-Wide Yeast Deletion Collections Cultured during Spaceflight,Corey Nislow; Anna Y. Lee; Patricia L. Allen; Guri Giaever; Andrew Smith; Marinella Gebbia; Louis S. Stodieck; Jeffrey S. Hammond; Holly H. Birdsall; Timothy G. Hammond,N/A,33,"Spaceflight is a unique environment with profound effects on biological systems including tissue redistribution and musculoskeletal stresses. However, the more subtle biological effects of spaceflight on cells and organisms are difficult to measure in a systematic, unbiased manner. Here we test the utility of the molecularly barcoded yeast deletion collection to provide a quantitative assessment of the effects of microgravity on a model organism. We developed robust hardware to screen, in parallel, the complete collection of ~4800 homozygous and ~5900 heterozygous (including ~1100 single-copy deletions of essential genes) yeast deletion strains, each carrying unique DNA that acts as strain identifiers. We compared strain fitness for the homozygous and heterozygous yeast deletion collections grown in spaceflight and ground, as well as plus and minus hyperosmolar sodium chloride, providing a second additive stressor. The genome-wide sensitivity profiles obtained from these treatments were then queried for their similarity to a compendium of drugs whose effects on the yeast collection have been previously reported. We found that the effects of spaceflight have high concordance with the effects of DNA-damaging agents and changes in redox state, suggesting mechanisms by which spaceflight may negatively affect cell fitness.",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4309212/
PMC6560652,Physical Forces Modulate Oxidative Status and Stress Defense Meditated Metabolic Adaptation of Yeast Colonies: Spaceflight and Microgravity Simulations,Timothy G. Hammond; Patricia L. Allen; Margaret A. Gunter; Jennifer Chiang; Guri Giaever; Corey Nislow; Holly H. Birdsall,Yeast; Microgravity; Reactive oxygen species; Spaceflight; Shear stress; Random positioning machine; Apoptosis,50,Baker’s yeast (,2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6560652/
PMC6321533,Effects of Space Flight on Mouse Liver versus Kidney: Gene Pathway Analyses,Timothy G. Hammond; Patricia L. Allen; Holly H. Birdsall,spaceflight; microgravity; gene expression; liver; kidney; gene array; gene expression; transcriptome; apoptosis; Cdkn1a; CYP4A1,15,"Understanding genome wide, tissue-specific, and spaceflight-induced changes in gene expression is critical to develop effective countermeasures. Transcriptome analysis has been performed on diverse tissues harvested from animals flown in space, but not the kidney. We determined the genome wide gene expression using a gene array analysis of kidney and liver tissue from mice flown in space for 12 days versus ground based control animals. By comparing the transcriptome of liver and kidney from animals flown in space versus ground control animals, we tested a unique hypothesis: Are there common gene expression pathways activated in multiple tissue types in response to spaceflight stimuli? Although there were tissue-specific changes, both liver and kidney overexpressed genes in the same four areas: (a) cellular responses to peptides, hormones, and nitrogen/organonitrogen compounds; (b) apoptosis and cell death; (c) fat cell differentiation and (d) negative regulation of protein kinase.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6321533/
PMC12040010,"
",Genzhu Wang; Hang Liu; Xiaoying Wang; Zhongdong Li,case report; central nervous system infection; cryptococcal meningitis; liposomal-amphotericin B; review,47,"Central nervous system (CNS) infections caused by A severely obese female patient was admitted to neurosurgical ward with lesions in the intracranial space and accompanying headache. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed prominent lesions in the right parietal and left frontal insular region. After glioma resection, She diagnosed histopathologically with a CNS infections of",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12040010/
PMC11833055,Behavioral and multiomics analysis of 3D clinostat simulated microgravity effect in mice focusing on the central nervous system,Li Zhou; Chenchen Song; Hu Yang; Lianlian Zhao; Xianglei Li; Xiuping Sun; Kai Gao; Jianguo Guo,Microgravity; Three-dimensional clinostat; Brain; Transcriptomics; Microbiomics; Serum metabolomics; Animal model; Neuroscience; Zoology; Risk factors; Environmental impact; Transcriptomics; Physiology,47,"A study was conducted to evaluate the three-dimensional clinostat simulated microgravity effect on mouse models, focusing on the central nervous system. Eighteen mice were divided into three groups: control, survival box, and clinostat + survival box. Behavioral tests, femur micro-CT, brain transcriptomics, serum metabolomics, and fecal microbiomics were performed. Results showed decreased activity, altered gait, enhanced fear memory, bone loss, immune/endocrine changes in brain transcriptome, and altered metabolic pathways in serum and gut microbiota in clinostat-treated mice. The model closely mimics spaceflight-induced transcriptome changes, suggesting its value in studying microgravity-related neurological alterations and highlighting the need for attention to emotional changes in space.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11833055/
PMC9146534,Three-Dimensional Kidney-on-a-Chip Assessment of Contrast-Induced Kidney Injury: Osmolality and Viscosity,Kipyo Kim; Beomgyun Jeong; Yun-Mi Lee; Hyung-Eun Son; Ji-Young Ryu; Seokwoo Park; Jong Cheol Jeong; Ho Jun Chin; Sejoong Kim,contrast-induced nephropathy; kidney-on-a-chip; acute kidney injury; contrast media,44,"Increased viscosity of concentrated contrast media (CM) in the renal tubules can perturb renal hemodynamics and have a detrimental effect on tubular epithelial cells. However, the effects of viscosity on contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) remain poorly understood. Conventional in vitro culture studies do not reflect the rheological properties of CM. Therefore, we investigated the effects of CM viscosity on renal tubules using a kidney-on-a-chip and two different types of CM. Renal proximal tubule epithelial cells (RPTEC) were cultured in a three-dimensional microfluidic culture platform under bidirectional fluid shear stress. We treated the RPTEC with two types of CM: low- (LOCM, iopromide) and iso-osmolar contrast media (IOCM, iodixanol). Renal tubular cell injury induced by LOCM and IOCM was examined under different iodine concentrations (50–250 mgI/mL) and shear-stress conditions. LOCM showed a significant dose-dependent cytotoxic effect, which was significantly higher than that of IOCM under static and low-to-moderate shear stress conditions. However, high shear-stress resulted in reduced cell viability in IOCM; no difference between IOCM and LOCM was found under high shear-stress conditions. The cytotoxic effects were pronounced at a mean shear stress of 1 dyn/cm",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9146534/
PMC11492218,"The Effect of Different Concentrations of Epinephrine in Otoendoscopic Surgery on Surgical Field Clarity: A Double-Blind, Randomized Study",Wenying Shu; Tingting Jin; Jinya Shi; Jingjie Li; Zhaoyan Wang,epinephrine; otoendoscopic; surgery; surgical field clarity; hemodynamics,20,"At present, there is no consensus on the concentration of epinephrine/physiological saline for subcutaneous injection into external auditory canal (EAC) under general anesthesia in otoendoscopic surgery. A randomized controlled trial (RCT) research is needed to provide reference, as this concentration can provide satisfactory surgical field clarity while maintaining patients’ hemodynamic stability. Comparison of the effect of subcutaneous injection of different concentrations of epinephrine/physiological saline into EAC under general anesthesia in otoendoscopic surgery on surgical field clarity and hemodynamics. This double-blind, RCT study was about the effect of topical epinephrine injection in otoendoscopic surgery. This study was conducted at a single institution. This study included 168 patients conformed to the inclusion criteria. Patients were randomized to receive different concentrations of epinephrine/physiological saline injection (1:5000, 1:10,000, 1:20,000, or 1:40,000) into the junction of bone and cartilage at posterior wall of EAC during surgery. Surgical field clarity was assessed with surgical field clarity grading scale and tympanic membrane flap flipping time. Hemodynamic changes were monitored by clinical parameters of blood pressure, heart rate, and ST segment of ECG. There were no statistically-significant differences in surgical field clarity grade ( Four concentration groups of topical epinephrine injection in otoendoscopic surgery have the same effect on surgical field clarity. For the stability of patients’ hemodynamics, we would prefer to recommend the use of concentrations with minimal impact on hemodynamics, ranging from 1:20,000 to 1:40,000. Clinical Trial Registry-China: ChiCTRI1800016647.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11492218/
PMC6339989,From the international space station to the clinic: how prolonged unloading may disrupt lumbar spine stability,Jeannie F. Bailey; Stephanie L. Miller; Kristine Khieu; Conor W. O’Neill; Robert M. Healey; Dezba G. Coughlin; Jojo V. Sayson; Douglas G. Chang; Alan R. Hargens; Jeffrey C. Lotz,Instability; Low back pain; Lumbar spine; Multifidus; Spaceflight; Unloading,0,"Prolonged microgravity exposure is associated with localized low back pain and an elevated risk of post-flight disc herniation. Although the mechanisms by which microgravity impairs the spine are unclear, they should be foundational for developing in-flight countermeasures for maintaining astronaut spine health. Because human spine anatomy has adapted to upright posture on Earth, observations of how spaceflight affects the spine should also provide new and potentially important information on spine biomechanics that benefit the general population. This study compares quantitative measures of lumbar spine anatomy, health, and bio-mechanics in astronauts before and after 6 months of microgravity exposure on board the International Space Station (ISS). This is a prospective longitudinal study. Six astronaut crewmember volunteers from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) with 6-month missions aboard the ISS comprised our study sample. For 3T magnetic resonance imaging and dynamic fluoroscopy of the lumbar spine were collected for each subject at two time points: approximately 30 days before launch (pre-flight) and 1 day following 6 months spaceflight on the ISS (post-flight). Outcome measures were compared between time points using paired Supine lumbar lordosis decreased (flattened) by an average of 11% (p=.019). Active FE ROM decreased for the middle three lumbar discs (L2–L3: −22.1%, p=.049; L3–L4: −17.3%, p=.016; L4–L5: −30.3%, p=.004). By contrast, no significant passive FE ROM changes in these discs were observed (p>.05). Disc water content did not differ systematically from pre- to post-flight. Multifidus and erector spinae changed variably between subjects, with five of six subjects experiencing an average decrease 20% for FCSA and 8%–9% for CSA in both muscles. For all subjects, changes in multifidus FCSA strongly correlated with changes in lordosis (r We observed that multifidus atrophy, rather than intervertebral disc swelling, associated strongly with lumbar flattening and increased stiffness. Because these changes have been previously linked with detrimental spine biomechanics and pain in terrestrial populations, when combined with evidence of pre-flight vertebral end plate insufficiency, they may elevate injury risk for astronauts upon return to gravity loading. Our results also have implications for deconditioned spines on Earth. We anticipate that our results will inform new astronaut countermeasures that target the multifidus muscles, and research on the role of muscular stability in relation to chronic low back pain and disc injury. © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6339989/
PMC4110898,Fifteen Days Microgravity Causes Growth in Calvaria of Mice,Bing Zhang; Esther Cory; Roshmi Bhattacharya; Robert Sah; Alan R Hargens,bone; adaptation; space; microgravity,0,"Bone remodeling may occur in spaceflight as a response to skeletal unloading and head-ward fluid shifts. While unloading causes significant loss of bone mass and density in legs of animals exposed to microgravity, increased blood and interstitial fluid flows accompanying microgravity-induced fluid redistribution may elicit an opposite effect in the head. Seven C57BL/6 mice were randomly chosen for exposure to 15 days of microgravity on the STS-131 mission, while eight littermates served as ground controls. Upon mission completion, all 15 mice calvariae were imaged on a micro-computed tomography scanner. A standardized rectangular volume was placed on the parietal bones of each calvaria for analyses, and three parameters were determined to measure increased parietal bone volume: bone volume (BV), cross-sectional thickness (CsTh), and tissue mineral density (TMD). Microgravity exposure caused a statistically significant increase in BV of the space flight (SF) group compared to the ground control (GC) group – the mean ± SD for SF group was 10.48 ± 0.47 %, compared to 9.64 ± 0.79 % for GC group (p<0.05). CsTh demonstrated a trend of increase from 0.099 ±0.006 mm in the GC group to 0.104 ±0.005 mm in the SF group (p=0.12). TMD was similar between the two groups with 0.878 ±0.029 g/cc for GC and 0.893 ± 0.028 g/cc for SF (p=0.31). Our results indicate that microgravity causes adaptive changes in calvarial bones that do not normally bear weight. These findings suggest that fluid shifts alone accompanying microgravity may initiate bone remodeling independent of skeletal loading by tissue.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4110898/
PMC3947616,Altered Disc Compression in Children with Idiopathic Low Back Pain: An Upright MRI Backpack Study,Stephen J. Shymon; Burt Yaszay; Jerry R. Dwek; James A. Proudfoot; Michael Donohue; Alan R. Hargens,backpacks; children; adolescents; disc compression; Intervertebral disc; idiopathic low back pain; MRI; upright MRI; lumbar lordosis; lumbar asymmetry,0,"This study is a repeated measures design to measure the lumbar spine’s response to common backpack loads in children with idiopathic low back pain (ILBP) using upright MRI. The purpose of this study is to analyze the lumbar spine’s response to backpack loads with upright MRI in ILBP children in order to compare their results to previously published normal child data under the same conditions. We hypothesize that typical backpack loads will have a different effect on the lumbar spine of normal and ILBP children. Research in normal children shows that backpack loads compress the lumbar IVDs, increase lumbar coronal deformity, and increase pain. Fifteen pediatric and adolescent patients with ILBP were selected. Patients were excluded if a spinal deformity, an underlying pathology, or known injury was identified. A 0.6T upright MRI scanner imaged the subjects while supine and standing wearing 0 kg, 4 kg, and 8 kg backpacks. IVD height, lumbar lordosis, lumbar coronal deformity, and pain score were recorded after each condition and compared using ANOVAs. We compared the above variables between ILBP and normal subjects using generalized least squares models. The cohort’s mean age was 13 ± 3 years. The 4 kg and 8 kg backpacks only compressed the L5-S1 IVD relative to upright with no load. Subjects experienced increasing pain with increasing load. Load had no effect on lumbar lordosis or lumbar coronal deformity. Compared to normal children, ILBP children experience significantly less disc compression at T12-L1 to L4-5, less lumbar lordosis, and more pain with increasing load. In ILBP children, increasing backpack load compresses only the L5-S1 IVD. Compared to normal children, ILBP children experience less lumbar IVD compression, less lumbar lordosis, and more pain due to increasing load suggesting altered mechanisms for load tolerance in ILBP children.",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3947616/
PMC5477841,Spaceflight-Induced Bone Loss Alters Failure Mode and Reduces Bending Strength in Murine Spinal Segments,Britta Berg-Johansen; Ellen C. Liebenberg; Alfred Li; Brandon R. Macias; Alan R. Hargens; Jeffrey C. Lotz,spaceflight; intervertebral disc; four-point bending; herniation; murine,0,"Intervertebral disc herniation rates are quadrupled in astronauts following spaceflight. While bending motions are main contributors to herniation, the effects of microgravity on the bending properties of spinal discs are unknown. Consequently, the goal of this study was to quantify the bending properties of tail discs from mice with or without microgravity exposure. Caudal motion segments from six mice returned from a 30-day Bion M1 mission and eight vivarium controls were loaded to failure in four-point bending. After testing, specimens were processed using histology to determine the location of failure, and adjacent motion segments were scanned with micro-computed tomography (μCT) to quantify bone properties. We observed that spaceflight significantly shortened the nonlinear toe region of the force-displacement curve by 32% and reduced the bending strength by 17%. Flight mouse spinal segments tended to fail within the growth plate and epiphyseal bone, while controls tended to fail at the disc-vertebra junction. Spaceflight significantly reduced vertebral bone volume fraction, bone mineral density, and trabecular thickness, which may explain the tendency of flight specimens to fail within the epiphyseal bone. Together, these results indicate that vertebral bone loss during spaceflight may degrade spine bending properties and contribute to increased disc herniation risk in astronauts.",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5477841/
PMC9139491,Spaceflight-Associated Vascular Remodeling and Gene Expression in Mouse Calvaria,Jamila H. Siamwala; Brandon R. Macias; Robert Healey; Brett Bennett; Alan R. Hargens,osteogenesis; angiogenesis; BMP-2; VEGFA; spaceflight; long-duration flight; gene expression,42,"Astronauts suffer from a loss of bone mass at a rate of 1.5% per month from lower regions of the body during the course of long-duration (>30 days) spaceflight, a phenomenon that poses important risks for returning crew. Conversely, a gain in bone mass may occur in non-load bearing regions of the body as related to microgravity-induced cephalad fluid shift. Representing non-load bearing regions with mouse calvaria and leveraging the STS-131 (15-day) and BION-M1 (30-day) flights, we examined spatial and temporal calvarial vascular remodeling and gene expression related to microgravity exposure compared between spaceflight (SF) and ground control (GC) cohorts. We examined parasagittal capillary numbers and structures in calvaria from 16 to 23 week-old C57BL/6 female mice (GC, n = 4; SF, n = 5) from STS-131 and 19–20 week-old C57BL/6 male mice (GC, n = 6; SF, n = 6) from BION-M1 using a robust isolectin-IB4 vessel marker. We found that the vessel diameter reduces significantly in mice exposed to 15 days of spaceflight relative to control. Capillarization increases by 30% (SF vs. GC,",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9139491/
PMC5515531,Exposure of ,Camille F Abshire; Kanchanjunga Prasai; Israel Soto; Runhua Shi; Monica Concha; Melody Baddoo; Erik K Flemington; Don G Ennis; Rona S Scott; Lynn Harrison,N/A,68,"Waterborne pathogenic mycobacteria can form biofilms, and certain species can cause hard-to-treat human lung infections. Astronaut health could therefore be compromised if the spacecraft environment or water becomes contaminated with pathogenic mycobacteria. This work uses",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5515531/
PMC3258067,Effects of mechanostimulation on gravitropism and signal persistence in flax roots,Susan P John; Karl H Hasenstein,mechanostimulation; memory; clinorotation speed and direction; signal persistence; signal saturation,0,"Gravitropism describes curvature of plants in response to gravity or differential acceleration and clinorotation is commonly used to compensate unilateral effect of gravity. We report on experiments that examine the persistence of the gravity signal and separate mechanostimulation from gravistimulation. Flax roots were reoriented (placed horizontally for 5, 10 or 15 min) and clinorotated at a rate of 0.5 to 5 rpm either vertically (parallel to the gravity vector and root axis) or horizontally (perpendicular to the gravity vector and parallel to the root axis). Image sequences showed that horizontal clinorotation did not affect root growth rate (0.81 ± 0.03 mm h",2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3258067/
PMC10025027,Amelioration of the physio-biochemical responses to salinity stress and computing the primary germination index components in cauliflower on seed priming,Tripti Gour; Anukriti Sharma; Ratan Lal; Monika Heikrujam; Anshul Gupta; Lokesh Kumar Agarwal; Siva P.K. Chetri; Rajesh Kumar; Kuldeep Sharma,Priming agents; Seed priming; Salt stress responses; Germination emergence,118,"The significant horticultural crop, cauliflower (",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10025027/
PMC7733933,"Desiccation Mitigates Heat Stress in the Resurrection Fern, ",Susan P. John; Karl H. Hasenstein,heat stress; hydroperoxide; lipid hydroperoxide; antioxidative enzymes; fatty acids,107,"Although heat and desiccation stresses often coincide, the response to heat especially in desiccation tolerant plants is rarely studied. We subjected hydrated",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7733933/
PMC9105288,Transcription Profile of Auxin Related Genes during Positively Gravitropic Hypocotyl Curvature of ,Chitra Ajala; Karl H. Hasenstein,Solid Phase Gene Extraction (SPGE); germination; gravitropism; hypocotyl; root,73,"Unlike typical negative gravitropic curvature, young hypocotyls of",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9105288/
PMC9617909,High-gradient magnetic fields and starch metabolism: results from a space experiment,K. H. Hasenstein; M. R. Park; S. P. John; C. Ajala,Biological techniques; Biophysics; Plant sciences,82,Directing plant growth in weightlessness requires understanding the processes that establish plant orientation and how to manipulate them. Both gravi- and phototropism determine directional growth and previous experiments showed that high gradient magnetic fields (HGMF) can induce curvature in roots and shoots. Experiments with,2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9617909/
PMC9695138,Lipid Rafts and Plant Gravisensitivity,Elizabeth L. Kordyum; Olga A. Artemenko; Karl H. Hasenstein,cell membrane; clinorotation; microdomains; sterols,139,"The necessity to include plants as a component of a Bioregenerative Life Support System leads to investigations to optimize plant growth facilities as well as a better understanding of the plant cell membrane and its numerous activities in the signaling, transport, and sensing of gravity, drought, and other stressors. The cell membrane participates in numerous processes, including endo- and exocytosis and cell division, and is involved in the response to external stimuli. Variable but stabilized microdomains form in membranes that include specific lipids and proteins that became known as (detergent-resistant) membrane microdomains, or lipid rafts with various subclassifications. The composition, especially the sterol-dependent recruitment of specific proteins affects endo- and exo-membrane domains as well as plasmodesmata. The enhanced saturated fatty acid content in lipid rafts after clinorotation suggests increased rigidity and reduced membrane permeability as a primary response to abiotic and mechanical stress. These results can also be obtained with lipid-sensitive stains. The linkage of the CM to the cytoskeleton via rafts is part of the complex interactions between lipid microdomains, mechanosensitive ion channels, and the organization of the cytoskeleton. These intricately linked structures and functions provide multiple future research directions to elucidate the role of lipid rafts in physiological processes.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9695138/
PMC3503204,MscS-Like10 is a stretch-activated ion channel from ,Grigory Maksaev; Elizabeth S. Haswell,N/A,0,"Like many other organisms, plants are capable of sensing and responding to mechanical stimuli such as touch, osmotic pressure, and gravity. One mechanism for the perception of force is the activation of mechanosensitive (or stretch-activated) ion channels, and a number of mechanosensitive channel activities have been described in plant membranes. Based on their homology to the bacterial mechanosensitive channel MscS, the 10 MscS-Like (MSL) proteins of",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3503204/
PMC5896955,The signaling lipid sphingosine 1-phosphate regulates mechanical pain,Rose Z Hill; Benjamin U Hoffman; Takeshi Morita; Stephanie M Campos; Ellen A Lumpkin; Rachel B Brem; Diana M Bautista,pain; mechanical pain; somatosensation; neuronal excitability; GPCR signaling; nociception; Mouse,78,"Somatosensory neurons mediate responses to diverse mechanical stimuli, from innocuous touch to noxious pain. While recent studies have identified distinct populations of A mechanonociceptors (AMs) that are required for mechanical pain, the molecular underpinnings of mechanonociception remain unknown. Here, we show that the bioactive lipid sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) and S1P Receptor 3 (S1PR3) are critical regulators of acute mechanonociception. Genetic or pharmacological ablation of S1PR3, or blockade of S1P production, significantly impaired the behavioral response to noxious mechanical stimuli, with no effect on responses to innocuous touch or thermal stimuli. These effects are mediated by fast-conducting A mechanonociceptors, which displayed a significant decrease in mechanosensitivity in S1PR3 mutant mice. We show that S1PR3 signaling tunes mechanonociceptor excitability via modulation of KCNQ2/3 channels. Our findings define a new role for S1PR3 in regulating neuronal excitability and establish the importance of S1P/S1PR3 signaling in the setting of mechanical pain thresholds.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5896955/
PMC4469364,Expressing and Characterizing Mechanosensitive Channels in Xenopus Oocytes,Grigory Maksaev; Elizabeth S. Haswell,Mechanosensitive ion channel; Heterologous expression; Patch-clamp electrophysiology; Pressure-clamp,0,The oocytes of the African clawed frog (,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4469364/
PMC4411250,The ongoing search for the molecular basis of plant osmosensing,Elizabeth S. Haswell; Paul E. Verslues,N/A,31,N/A,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4411250/
PMC5047659,Plastid osmotic stress influences cell differentiation at the plant shoot apex,Margaret E. Wilson; Matthew Mixdorf; R. Howard Berg; Elizabeth S. Haswell,Cytokinin; Plastid; Reactive oxygen species; Retrograde signaling; Shoot apical meristem,0,"The balance between proliferation and differentiation in the plant shoot apical meristem is controlled by regulatory loops involving the phytohormone cytokinin and stem cell identity genes. Concurrently, cellular differentiation in the developing shoot is coordinated with the environmental and developmental status of plastids within those cells. Here, we employ an",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5047659/
PMC5454470,Spaceflight-induced synaptic modifications within hair cells of the mammalian utricle,David R. Sultemeier; Kristel R. Choy; Felix E. Schweizer; Larry F. Hoffman,synaptic ribbon; ribeye; CtBP2; Shank1a; plasticity; resampling; linear mixed effects,0,"Spaceflight imposes a radically different sensory environment from that in which the inner ear utricle normally operates. We investigated synaptic modifications in utricles from mice flown aboard a space shuttle mission. Structural synaptic plasticity was detected in the medial extrastriola, a region associated with encoding static head position, as decreased synapse density. These results are remarkably congruent with a recent report of decreased utricular function in astronauts immediately after returning from the International Space Station.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5454470/
PMC5515506,Effects of angular frequency during clinorotation on mesenchymal stem cell morphology and migration,Carlos Luna; Alvin G Yew; Adam H Hsieh,N/A,50,"To determine the short-term effects of simulated microgravity on mesenchymal stem cell behaviors—as a function of clinorotation speed—using time-lapse microscopy. Ground-based microgravity simulation can reproduce the apparent effects of weightlessness in spaceflight using clinostats that continuously reorient the gravity vector on a specimen, creating a time-averaged nullification of gravity. In this work, we investigated the effects of clinorotation speed on the morphology, cytoarchitecture, and migration behavior of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). We compared cell responses at clinorotation speeds of 0, 30, 60, and 75 rpm over 8 h in a recently developed lab-on-chip-based clinostat system. Time-lapse light microscopy was used to visualize changes in cell morphology during and after cessation of clinorotation. Cytoarchitecture was assessed by actin and vinculin staining, and chemotaxis was examined using time-lapse light microscopy of cells in NGF (100 ng/ml) gradients. Among clinorotated groups, cell area distributions indicated a greater inhibition of cell spreading with higher angular frequency ( These results indicate that hMSCs respond to clinorotation by adopting more rounded, less-spread morphologies. The angular frequency-dependence suggests that a cell’s ability to sense the changing gravity vector is governed by the rate of perturbation. For migration studies, cells cultured in clinorotated chemotaxis chambers were generally less motile and exhibited retraction instead of migration.",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5515506/
PMC3044105,"The role of FGF-2 and BMP-2 in regulation of gene induction, cell proliferation and mineralization",Millie Hughes-Fulford; Chai-Fei Li,N/A,35,"The difficulty in re-growing and mineralizing new bone after severe fracture can result in loss of ambulation or limb. Here we describe the sequential roles of FGF-2 in inducing gene expression, cell growth and BMP-2 in gene expression and mineralization of bone. The regulation of gene expression was determined using real-time RTPCR (qRTPCR) and cell proliferation was measured by thymidine incorporation or fluorescent analysis of DNA content in MC3T3E1 osteoblast-like cells. Photomicroscopy was used to identify newly mineralized tissue and fluorescence was used to quantify mineralization. Fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) had the greatest ability to induce proliferation after 24 hours of treatment when compared to transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ, insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), bone morphogenic protein (BMP-2), platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) or prostaglandin E The ability of FGF-2 to re-program a mineralizing gene expression profile to one of proliferation suggests that FGF-2 plays a critical role of osteoblast growth in early fracture repair while BMP-2 is instrumental in stimulating mineralization.",2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3044105/
PMC3002170,"Nutritional supplements, ",June M. Chan; Vivian Weinberg; Mark J. Magbanua; Eduardo Sosa; Jeffry Simko; Katsuto Shinohara; Scot Federman; Mike Mattie; Millie Hughes-Fulford; Christopher Haqq; Peter R. Carroll,Prostate cancer; Active surveillance; Fish oil; Lycopene; Randomized clinical trial,44,"Nutritional factors are associated with reduced risk of prostate cancer progression, yet mechanisms remain unclear. We examined the effects of lycopene and fish oil supplements versus placebo on the normal prostate microenvironment, among men pursuing active surveillance for low-burden prostate cancer. We hypothesized that lycopene or fish oil supplements would down-regulate insulin-like growth factor-1 ( We conducted a 3-month randomized, double-blinded, clinical trial comparing prostate tissue gene expression profiles (assessed by qRT–PCR) among men with favorable-risk prostate cancer receiving either 30 mg/day lycopene, 3 g/day fish oil (including 1,098 mg eicosapentaenoic and 549 mg docosahexaenoic fatty acid Among 69 men (22 assigned to lycopene, 21 to fish, and 26 to placebo), there was no difference in the change from baseline to the 3 months in Compared to placebo, 3-month intervention with lycopene or fish oil did not significantly change",2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3002170/
PMC6188462,To infinity … and beyond! Human spaceflight and life science,Millie Hughes-Fulford,spaceflight; osteoporosis; microgravity; red blood cell anemia; immunosuppression,0,N/A,2011,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6188462/
PMC11470607,Over-activation of iNKT cells aggravate lung injury in bronchopulmonary dysplasia mice,Ming-Yan Wang; Meng-Xu Yi; Xing-Yu Mo; Shan-Jie Wei; Yu Qiao; Zheng Zhang; Zhao-Liang Su; Hong-Yan Lu,Alveolar type II epithelial cells; Bronchopulmonary dysplasia; Differentiation; Invariant natural killer T cells; Ferroptosis,70,"Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a severe lung disease in preterm infants, the abnormal proliferate and differentiate ability of type II epithelial cells (AEC II) is the key to the pathological basis of BPD. Mechanisms regarding abnormal AEC II in BPD remain unclear. The present work investigated the role and mechanisms of invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells in lung disorder in BPD using public datasets, clinical samples, a hyperoxia-induced BPD mouse model and AEC II-iNKT cells transwell co-culture system. Firstly, we found that the NKT cells development factor IL-15 increased over time in patients with BPD in public databases, and clinically collected peripheral blood NKT cells in patients with BPD were increased. Subsequently, the percentage of iNKT cells increased in hyperoxia group compared with normoxia group, with the highest at P7, accompanied by increased activation with abnormal lung development. The administration of anti-CD1d neutralizing antibody to inhibit iNKT cells could alleviate the abnormal lung development of hyperoxia group mice, while α-GalCer administration could aggravate lung injury in hyperoxia group mice, and adoptive transfer of iNKT cells could aggravate the abnormal lung development in hyperoxia group mice. In addition, to further verify the role of iNKT cells on AEC II, AEC II-iNKT cells co-culture system was established. The presence of iNKT cells could aggravate the abnormal expression of SP-C and T1α under hyperoxia. Meanwhile, RNA-seq analysis showed that ferroptosis-related genes were highly expressed in AEC II co-cultured with iNKT cells under hyperoxia. We further validated the effect of the presence of iNKT cells under hyperoxia environment on AEC II ferroptosis levels, suggested that iNKT cells promote AEC II ferroptosis under hyperoxia, accompanied by decreased expression of SP-C and T1α. Our study found that the recruitment of iNKT cells in the lung may be an important cause of alveolarization disorder in BPD.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11470607/
PMC3603133,"Effects of Gravitational Mechanical Unloading in Endothelial Cells: Association between Caveolins, Inflammation and Adhesion Molecules",S. Marlene Grenon; Marion Jeanne; Jesus Aguado-Zuniga; Michael S. Conte; Millie Hughes-Fulford,N/A,58,"Mechanical forces including gravity affect endothelial cell (ECs) function, and have been implicated in vascular disease as well as physiologic changes associated with low gravity environments. The goal of this study was to investigate the impact of gravitational mechanical unloading on ECs phenotype as determined by patterns of gene expression. Human umbilical vascular endothelial cells were exposed to 1-gravity environment or mechanical unloading (MU) for 24 hours, with or without periods of mechanical loading (ML). MU led to a significant decrease in gene expression of several adhesion molecules and pro-inflammatory cytokines. On the contrary, eNOS, Caveolin-1 and -2 expression were significantly increased with MU. There was a decrease in the length and width of the cells with MU. Addition of ML during the MU period was sufficient to reverse the changes triggered by MU. Our results suggest that gravitational loading could dramatically affect vascular endothelial cell function.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3603133/
PMC6462350,Fish Oil Increases Specialized Pro-resolving Lipid Mediators in PAD (The OMEGA-PAD II Trial),Joel L. Ramirez; Warren J. Gasper; Sukaynah A. Khetani; Greg J. Zahner; Nancy K. Hills; Pete T. Mitchell; Brian E. Sansbury; Michael S. Conte; Matthew Spite; S. Marlene Grenon,Peripheral artery disease; n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids; Fish oils; Specialized pro-resolving lipid mediators; Other pharmacotherapy,0,"N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) supplementation has been associated with reduced mortality and inflammation in patients with cardiovascular disease. There are limited data on the effects of n-3 PUFA supplementation in patients with peripheral artery disease (PAD). The OMEGA-PAD II trial was a double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled trial to assess the effect of 3 mo of high-dose oral n-3 PUFA supplementation on inflammation, endothelial function, and walking ability in patients with PAD. Twenty-four patients with claudication received 4.4 g/d of fish oil or placebo for 3 mo. Outcomes measured included high-sensitivity C-reactive protein levels, the omega-3 index, endothelial function as measured via flow-mediated vasodilation, walking impairment questionnaire, and a 6-min walk test. Plasma levels of specialized pro-resolving lipid mediators (SPMs) were measured by liquid-chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. In patients treated with fish oil, the absolute mean omega-3 index significantly increased from baseline (fish oil: 7.2 ± 1.2%, Fish oil increases SPMs in plasma of patients with PAD. Further studies are required to determine whether these early changes translate to clinical improvements in patients with PAD.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6462350/
PMC4012541,Molecular mechanisms underlying the enhanced functions of three-dimensional hepatocyte aggregates,Tammy T. Chang; Millie Hughes-Fulford,three-dimensional cell culture; bioreactor; hepatocyte; microarray; gene expression; spheroid,0,"Three-dimensional (3D) culture of hepatocytes leads to improved and prolonged synthetic and metabolic functions, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown. In order to investigate the role of 3D cell-cell interactions in maintaining hepatocyte differentiated functions",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4012541/
PMC4653058,Spaceflight alters expression of microRNA during T-cell activation,Millie Hughes-Fulford; Tammy T. Chang; Emily M. Martinez; Chai-Fei Li,gene expression; microgravity; epigenetics; immune response,0,"Altered immune function has been demonstrated in astronauts during spaceflights dating back to Apollo and Skylab; this could be a major barrier to long-term space exploration. We tested the hypothesis that spaceflight causes changes in microRNA (miRNA) expression. Human leukocytes were stimulated with mitogens on board the International Space Station using an onboard normal gravity control. Bioinformatics showed that miR-21 was significantly up-regulated 2-fold during early T-cell activation in normal gravity, and gene expression was suppressed under microgravity. This was confirmed using quantitative real-time PCR (",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4653058/
PMC6137544,Spaceflight impairs antigen-specific tolerance induction ,Tammy T. Chang; Sandra M. Spurlock; Tara Lynne T. Candelario; S. Marlene Grenon; Millie Hughes-Fulford,inflammation; microgravity; T-cell memory; T-cell tolerance; transgenic model,0,"The health risks of a dysregulated immune response during spaceflight are important to understand as plans emerge for humans to embark on long-term space travel to Mars. In this first-of-its-kind study, we used adoptive transfer of T-cell receptor transgenic OT-II CD4 T cells to track an",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6137544/
PMC2913424,From Cellular Mechanotransduction to Biologically Inspired Engineering,Donald E. Ingber,Mechanotransduction; Tensegrity; Cell mechanics; Prestress; Cytoskeleton; Integrin; Biomimetic,0,"This article is based on a lecture I presented as the recipient of the 2009 Pritzker Distinguished Lecturer Award at the Biomedical Engineering Society annual meeting in October 2009. Here, I review more than thirty years of research from my laboratory, beginning with studies designed to test the theory that cells use tensegrity (tensional integrity) architecture to stabilize their shape and sense mechanical signals, which I believed to be critical for control of cell function and tissue development. Although I was trained as a cell biologist, I found that the tools I had at my disposal were insufficient to experimentally test these theories, and thus I ventured into engineering to find critical solutions. This path has been extremely fruitful as it has led to confirmation of the critical role that physical forces play in developmental control, as well as how cells sense and respond to mechanical signals at the molecular level through a process known as cellular mechanotransduction. Many of the predictions of the cellular tensegrity model relating to cell mechanical behaviors have been shown to be valid, and this vision of cell structure led to discovery of the central role that transmembrane adhesion receptors, such as integrins, and the cytoskeleton play in mechanosensing and mechanochemical conversion. In addition, these fundamental studies have led to significant unexpected technology fallout, including development of micromagnetic actuators for non-invasive control of cellular signaling, microfluidic systems as therapeutic extracorporeal devices for sepsis therapy, and new DNA-based nanobiotechnology approaches that permit construction of artificial tensegrities that mimic properties of living materials for applications in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine.",2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2913424/
PMC7190111,Crewmember microbiome may influence microbial composition of ISS habitable surfaces,Aram Avila-Herrera; James Thissen; Camilla Urbaniak; Nicholas A. Be; David J. Smith; Fathi Karouia; Satish Mehta; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Crystal Jaing,N/A,57,"The International Space Station (ISS) is a complex built environment physically isolated from Earth. Assessing the interplay between the microbial community of the ISS and its crew is important for preventing biomedical and structural complications for long term human spaceflight missions. In this study, we describe one crewmember’s microbial profile from body swabs of mouth, nose, ear, skin and saliva that were collected at eight different time points pre-, during and post-flight. Additionally, environmental surface samples from eight different habitable locations in the ISS were collected from two flights. Environmental samples from one flight were collected by the crewmember and samples from the next flight were collected after the crewmember departed. The microbial composition in both environment and crewmember samples was measured using shotgun metagenomic sequencing and processed using the Livermore Metagenomics Analysis Toolkit. Ordination of sample to sample distances showed that of the eight crew body sites analyzed, skin, nostril, and ear samples are more similar in microbial composition to the ISS surfaces than mouth and saliva samples; and that the microbial composition of the crewmember’s skin samples are more closely related to the ISS surface samples collected by the crewmember on the same flight than ISS surface samples collected by other crewmembers on different flights. In these collections, species alpha diversity in saliva samples appears to decrease during flight and rebound after returning to Earth. This is the first study to compare the ISS microbiome to a crewmember’s microbiome via shotgun metagenomic sequencing. We observed that the microbiome of the surfaces inside the ISS resemble those of the crew’s skin. These data support future crew and ISS microbial surveillance efforts and the design of preventive measures to maintain crew habitat onboard spacecraft destined for long term space travel.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7190111/
PMC7382458,Sierra Nevada sweep: metagenomic measurements of bioaerosols vertically distributed across the troposphere,Crystal Jaing; James Thissen; Michael Morrison; Michael B. Dillon; Samantha M. Waters; Garrett T. Graham; Nicholas A. Be; Patrick Nicoll; Sonali Verma; Tristan Caro; David J. Smith,Biological techniques; Microbiology; Environmental sciences,54,"To explore how airborne microbial patterns change with height above the Earth’s surface, we flew NASA’s C-20A aircraft on two consecutive days in June 2018 along identical flight paths over the US Sierra Nevada mountain range at four different altitudes ranging from 10,000 ft to 40,000 ft. Bioaerosols were analyzed by metagenomic DNA sequencing and traditional culturing methods to characterize the composition and diversity of atmospheric samples compared to experimental controls. The relative abundance of taxa changed significantly at each altitude sampled, and the diversity profile shifted across the two sampling days, revealing a regional atmospheric microbiome that is dynamically changing. The most proportionally abundant microbial genera were",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7382458/
PMC8444978,Draft Genome Sequences of Fungi Isolated from the International Space Station during the Microbial Tracking-2 Experiment,Anna C. Simpson; Camilla Urbaniak; John R. Bateh; Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Marilyne Debieu; Niamh B. O’Hara; Jos Houbraken; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,36,"As part of the Microbial Tracking-2 study, 94 fungal strains were isolated from surfaces on the International Space Station, and whole-genome sequences were assembled. Characterization of these draft genomes will allow evaluation of microgravity adaption, risks to human health and spacecraft functioning, and biotechnological applications of fungi.",2021,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8444978/
PMC9241228,"Microbial Tracking-2, a metagenomics analysis of bacteria and fungi onboard the International Space Station",Camilla Urbaniak; Michael D. Morrison; James B. Thissen; Fathi Karouia; David J. Smith; Satish Mehta; Crystal Jaing; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,International Space Station; Microbial monitoring; Microbiome; Metagenomics; Microbial tracking; Built environment,58,"The International Space Station (ISS) is a unique and complex built environment with the ISS surface microbiome originating from crew and cargo or from life support recirculation in an almost entirely closed system. The Microbial Tracking 1 (MT-1) project was the first ISS environmental surface study to report on the metagenome profiles without using whole-genome amplification. The study surveyed the microbial communities from eight surfaces over a 14-month period. The Microbial Tracking 2 (MT-2) project aimed to continue the work of MT-1, sampling an additional four flights from the same locations, over another 14 months. Eight surfaces across the ISS were sampled with sterile wipes and processed upon return to Earth. DNA extracted from the processed samples (and controls) were treated with propidium monoazide (PMA) to detect intact/viable cells or left untreated and to detect the total DNA population (free DNA/compromised cells/intact cells/viable cells). DNA extracted from PMA-treated and untreated samples were analyzed using shotgun metagenomics. Samples were cultured for bacteria and fungi to supplement the above results. Utilizing various metagenomics analyses and culture methods, we provided a comprehensive analysis of the ISS surface microbiome, showing microbial burden, bacterial and fungal species prevalence, changes in the microbiome, and resistome over time and space, as well as the functional capabilities and microbial interactions of this unique built microbiome. Data from this study may help to inform policies for future space missions to ensure an ISS surface microbiome that promotes astronaut health and spacecraft integrity. Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01293-0.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9241228/
PMC8953707,Detection of Target Genes for Drug Repurposing to Treat Skeletal Muscle Atrophy in Mice Flown in Spaceflight,Vidya Manian; Jairo Orozco-Sandoval; Victor Diaz-Martinez; Heeralal Janwa; Carlos Agrinsoni,machine learning; skeletal muscle atrophy; graph convolutional neural networks; graph neural network; random forest; gradient boosting method; knowledge graphs; node embeddings; random walk; diseases; drugs; link prediction,58,"Skeletal muscle atrophy is a common condition in aging, diabetes, and in long duration spaceflights due to microgravity. This article investigates multi-modal gene disease and disease drug networks via link prediction algorithms to select drugs for repurposing to treat skeletal muscle atrophy. Key target genes that cause muscle atrophy in the left and right extensor digitorum longus muscle tissue, gastrocnemius, quadriceps, and the left and right soleus muscles are detected using graph theoretic network analysis, by mining the transcriptomic datasets collected from mice flown in spaceflight made available by GeneLab. We identified the top muscle atrophy gene regulators by the Pearson correlation and Bayesian Markov blanket method. The gene disease knowledge graph was constructed using the scalable precision medicine knowledge engine. We computed node embeddings, random walk measures from the networks. Graph convolutional networks, graph neural networks, random forest, and gradient boosting methods were trained using the embeddings, network features for predicting links and ranking top gene-disease associations for skeletal muscle atrophy. Drugs were selected and a disease drug knowledge graph was constructed. Link prediction methods were applied to the disease drug networks to identify top ranked drugs for therapeutic treatment of skeletal muscle atrophy. The graph convolution network performs best in link prediction based on receiver operating characteristic curves and prediction accuracies. The key genes involved in skeletal muscle atrophy are associated with metabolic and neurodegenerative diseases. The drugs selected for repurposing using the graph convolution network method were nutrients, corticosteroids, anti-inflammatory medications, and others related to insulin.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8953707/
PMC11166646,Release of CD36-associated cell-free mitochondrial DNA and RNA as a hallmark of space environment response,Nailil Husna; Tatsuya Aiba; Shin-Ichiro Fujita; Yoshika Saito; Dai Shiba; Takashi Kudo; Satoru Takahashi; Satoshi Furukawa; Masafumi Muratani,Transcriptomics; Energy metabolism; Calcium and vitamin D,80,"A detailed understanding of how spaceflight affects human health is essential for long-term space exploration. Liquid biopsies allow for minimally-invasive multi-omics assessments that can resolve the molecular heterogeneity of internal tissues. Here, we report initial results from the JAXA Cell-Free Epigenome Study, a liquid biopsy study with six astronauts who resided on the International Space Station (ISS) for more than 120 days. Analysis of plasma cell-free RNA (cfRNA) collected before, during, and after spaceflight confirms previously reported mitochondrial dysregulation in space. Screening with 361 cell surface marker antibodies identifies a mitochondrial DNA-enriched fraction associated with the scavenger receptor CD36. RNA-sequencing of the CD36 fraction reveals tissue-enriched RNA species, suggesting the plasma mitochondrial components originated from various tissues. We compare our plasma cfRNA data to mouse plasma cfRNA data from a previous JAXA mission, which had used on-board artificial gravity, and discover a link between microgravity and the observed mitochondrial responses.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166646/
PMC3747666,Increasing the Number of Unloading/Reambulation Cycles does not Adversely Impact Body Composition and Lumbar Bone Mineral Density but Reduces Tissue Sensitivity,Shikha Gupta; Sarah L Manske; Stefan Judex,adipose tissue; muscle; bone; hindlimb unloading; reambulation,0,"A single exposure to hindlimb unloading leads to changes in body mass, body composition and bone, but the consequences of multiple exposures are not yet understood. Within a 18wk period, adult C57BL/6 male mice were exposed to one (1x-HLU), two (2x-HLU) or three (3x-HLU) cycles of 2 wk of hindlimb unloading (HLU) followed by 4 wk of reambulation (RA), or served as ambulatory age-matched controls.",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3747666/
PMC4337661,Bone shaft bending strength index is unaffected by exercise and unloading in mice,Ian J Wallace; Shikha Gupta; Jeyantt Sankaran; Brigitte Demes; Stefan Judex,anthropology; bioarchaeology; bone functional adaptation; cortical bone; cross-sectional geometry; diaphyseal shape; physical activity,0,Anthropologists frequently use the shaft bending strength index to infer the physical activity levels of humans living in the past from their lower limb bone remains. This index is typically calculated as the ratio of bone shaft second moments of area about orthogonal principal axes (i.e.,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4337661/
PMC4631774,Focal enhancement of the skeleton to exercise correlates with responsivity of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells rather than peak external forces,Ian J. Wallace; Gabriel M. Pagnotti; Jasper Rubin-Sigler; Matthew Naeher; Lynn E. Copes; Stefan Judex; Clinton T. Rubin; Brigitte Demes,Physical activity; Ground reaction forces; Bone adaptation; Cortical bone; Trabecular bone; Osteoprogenitor cells; Mechanical loading,0,"Force magnitudes have been suggested to drive the structural response of bone to exercise. As importantly, the degree to which any given bone can adapt to functional challenges may be enabled, or constrained, by regional variation in the capacity of marrow progenitors to differentiate into bone-forming cells. Here, we investigate the relationship between bone adaptation and mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) responsivity in growing mice subject to exercise. First, using a force plate, we show that peak external forces generated by forelimbs during quadrupedal locomotion are significantly higher than hindlimb forces. Second, by subjecting mice to treadmill running and then measuring bone structure with μCT, we show that skeletal effects of exercise are site-specific but not defined by load magnitudes. Specifically, in the forelimb, where external forces generated by running were highest, exercise failed to augment diaphyseal structure in either the humerus or radius, nor did it affect humeral trabecular structure. In contrast, in the ulna, femur and tibia, exercise led to significant enhancements of diaphyseal bone areas and moments of area. Trabecular structure was also enhanced by running in the femur and tibia. Finally, using flow cytometry, we show that marrow-derived MSCs in the femur are more responsive to exercise-induced loads than humeral cells, such that running significantly lowered MSC populations only in the femur. Together, these data suggest that the ability of the progenitor population to differentiate toward osteoblastogenesis may correlate better with bone structural adaptation than peak external forces caused by exercise.",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4631774/
PMC5052530,"Cytoskeletal Configuration Modulates Mechanically Induced Changes in Mesenchymal Stem Cell Osteogenesis, Morphology, and Stiffness",Suphannee Pongkitwitoon; Gunes Uzer; Janet Rubin; Stefan Judex,N/A,61,"Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) responding to mechanical cues generated by physical activity is critical for skeletal development and remodeling. Here, we utilized low intensity vibrations (LIV) as a physiologically relevant mechanical signal and hypothesized that the confined cytoskeletal configuration imposed by 2D culture will enable human bone marrow MSCs (hBMSC) to respond more robustly when LIV is applied in-plane (horizontal-LIV) rather than out-of-plane (vertical-LIV). All LIV signals enhanced hBMSC proliferation, osteogenic differentiation, and upregulated genes associated with cytoskeletal structure. The cellular response was more pronounced at higher frequencies (100 Hz vs 30 Hz) and when applied in the horizontal plane. Horizontal but not vertical LIV realigned the cell cytoskeleton, culminating in increased cell stiffness. Our results show that applying very small oscillatory motions within the primary cell attachment plane, rather than perpendicular to it, amplifies the cell’s response to LIV, ostensibly facilitating a more effective transfer of intracellular forces. Transcriptional and structural changes in particular with horizontal LIV, together with the strong frequency dependency of the signal, emphasize the importance of intracellular cytoskeletal configuration in sensing and responding to high-frequency mechanical signals at low intensities.",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5052530/
PMC5114340,Genetic and tissue level muscle-bone interactions during unloading and reambulation,S. Judex; W. Zhang; L.R. Donahue; E. Ozcivici,Muscle; Bone; Disuse; Genetics; Mouse,46,"Little is known about interactions between muscle and bone during the removal and application of mechanical signals. Here, we applied 3wk of hindlimb unloading followed by 3wk of reambulation to a genetically heterogeneous population of 352 adult mice and tested the hypothesis that changes in muscle are associated with changes in bone at the level of the tissue and the genome. During unloading and relative to normally ambulating control mice, most mice lost muscle and cortical bone with large variability across the population. During reambulation, individual mice regained bone and muscle at different rates. Across mice, changes in muscle and trabecular/cortical bone were not correlated to each other during unloading or reambulation. For unloading, we found one significant quantitative trait locus (QTL) for muscle area and five QTLs for cortical bone without overlap between mechano-sensitive muscle and cortical bone QTLs (but some overlap between muscle and trabecular QTLs). The low correlations between morphological changes in muscle and bone, together with the largely distinct genetic regulation of the response indicate that the premise of a muscle-bone unit that co-adjusts its size during (un)loading may need to be reassessed.",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5114340/
PMC5488280,Osteocyte Apoptosis Caused by Hindlimb Unloading is Required to Trigger Osteocyte RANKL Production and Subsequent Resorption of Cortical and Trabecular Bone in Mice Femurs,Pamela Cabahug-Zuckerman; Dorra Frikha-Benayed; Robert J Majeska; Alyssa Tuthill; Shoshana Yakar; Stefan Judex; Mitchell B Schaffler,N/A,0,"Osteocyte apoptosis is essential to activate bone remodeling in response to fatigue microdamage and estrogen withdrawal, such that apoptosis inhibition in vivo prevents the onset of osteoclastic resorption. Osteocyte apoptosis has also been spatially linked to bone resorption owing to disuse, but whether apoptosis plays a similar controlling role is unclear. We, therefore, 1) evaluated the spatial and temporal effects of disuse from hindlimb unloading (HLU) on osteocyte apoptosis, receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL) expression, bone resorption, and loss in mouse femora, and 2) tested whether osteocyte apoptosis was required to activate osteoclastic activity in cortical and trabecular bone by treating animals subjected to HLU with the pan-caspase apoptosis inhibitor, QVD (quinolyl-valyl-O-methylaspartyl-[-2,6-difluorophenoxy]-methylketone). Immunohistochemistry was used to identify apoptotic and RANKL-producing osteocytes in femoral diaphysis and distal trabecular bone, and μCT was used to determine the extent of trabecular bone loss owing to HLU. In both cortical and trabecular bone, 5 days of HLU increased osteocyte apoptosis significantly (3- and 4-fold, respectively,",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5488280/
PMC9293686,Differential Single Cell Responses of Embryonic Stem Cells Versus Embryoid Bodies to Gravity Mechanostimulation,Cassandra M. Juran; Justina Zvirblyte; Eduardo A.C. Almeida,mechanotransduction; embryoid bodies; embryonic stem cells; single cell RNA sequencing; development,45,"The forces generated by gravity have shaped life on Earth and impact gene expression and morphogenesis during early development. Conversely, disuse on Earth or during spaceflight, reduces normal mechanical loading of organisms, resulting in altered cell and tissue function. Although gravity mechanical loading in adult mammals is known to promote increased cell proliferation and differentiation, little is known about how distinct cell types respond to gravity mechanostimulation during early development. In this study we sought to understand, with single cell RNA-sequencing resolution, how a 60-min pulse of 50",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9293686/
PMC6091969,Macrophages inhibit ,Emily E. Rosowski; Nicholas Raffa; Benjamin P. Knox; Netta Golenberg; Nancy P. Keller; Anna Huttenlocher,N/A,73,"In immunocompromised individuals,",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6091969/
PMC7029147,Contributions of Spore Secondary Metabolites to UV-C Protection and Virulence Vary in Different ,Adriana Blachowicz; Nicholas Raffa; Jin Woo Bok; Tsokyi Choera; Benjamin Knox; Fang Yun Lim; Anna Huttenlocher; Clay C. C. Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Nancy P. Keller,space station; UV-C; melanin; secondary metabolite; spore; virulence determinants,66,Fungal spores contain secondary metabolites that can protect them from a multitude of abiotic and biotic stresses. Conidia (asexual spores) of the human pathogen,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7029147/
PMC3092937,Regulation of Hemocytes in ,Kurt Kleinhesselink; Corinna Conway; David Sholer; Irvin Huang; Deborah A. Kimbrell,Hemocytes; Cytochrome b5; Melanotic tumors; Granulomas,84,A major category of mutant hematopoietic phenotypes in,2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3092937/
PMC5748516,A novel blue-light phototropic response is revealed in roots of ,Joshua P. Vandenbrink; Raul Herranz; F. Javier Medina; Richard E. Edelmann; John Z. Kiss,Arabidopsis; Fractional gravity; Microgravity; Phototropism; Reduced gravity; Spaceflight,0,"Due to their sessile nature, plants utilize environmental cues to grow and respond to their surroundings. Two of these cues, light and gravity, play a substantial role in plant orientation and directed growth movements (tropisms). However, very little is currently known about the interaction between light- (phototropic) and gravity (gravitropic)-mediated growth responses. Utilizing the European Modular Cultivation System on board the International Space Station, we investigated the interaction between phototropic and gravitropic responses in three",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5748516/
PMC9287483,Recent transcriptomic studies to elucidate the plant adaptive response to spaceflight and to simulated space environments,Aránzazu Manzano; Eugénie Carnero-Diaz; Raúl Herranz; F. Javier Medina,Plant biology; Omics; Space sciences; Microgravity sciences,52,"Discovering the adaptation mechanisms of plants to the space environment is essential for supporting human space exploration. Transcriptomic analyses allow the identification of adaptation response pathways by detecting changes in gene expression at the global genome level caused by the main factors of the space environment, namely altered gravity and cosmic radiation. This article reviews transcriptomic studies carried out from plants grown in spaceflights and in different ground-based microgravity simulators. Despite differences in plant growth conditions, these studies have shown that cell wall remodeling, oxidative stress, defense response, and photosynthesis are common altered processes in plants grown under spaceflight conditions. European scientists have significantly contributed to the acquisition of this knowledge, e.g., by showing the role of red light in the adaptation response of plants (EMCS experiments) and the mechanisms of cellular response and adaptation mostly affecting cell cycle regulation, using cell cultures in microgravity simulators.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9287483/
PMC5748516,A novel blue-light phototropic response is revealed in roots of ,Joshua P. Vandenbrink; Raul Herranz; F. Javier Medina; Richard E. Edelmann; John Z. Kiss,Arabidopsis; Fractional gravity; Microgravity; Phototropism; Reduced gravity; Spaceflight,0,"Due to their sessile nature, plants utilize environmental cues to grow and respond to their surroundings. Two of these cues, light and gravity, play a substantial role in plant orientation and directed growth movements (tropisms). However, very little is currently known about the interaction between light- (phototropic) and gravity (gravitropic)-mediated growth responses. Utilizing the European Modular Cultivation System on board the International Space Station, we investigated the interaction between phototropic and gravitropic responses in three",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5748516/
PMC4211383,Light and gravity signals synergize in modulating plant development,Joshua P. Vandenbrink; John Z. Kiss; Raul Herranz; F. Javier Medina,gravitropism; phototropism; phytochromes; auxin; meristematic cells; cell cycle; ribosome biogenesis; space biology,215,"Tropisms are growth-mediated plant movements that help plants to respond to changes in environmental stimuli. The availability of water and light, as well as the presence of a constant gravity vector, are all environmental stimuli that plants sense and respond to via directed growth movements (tropisms). The plant response to gravity (gravitropism) and the response to unidirectional light (phototropism) have long been shown to be interconnected growth phenomena. Here, we discuss the similarities in these two processes, as well as the known molecular mechanisms behind the tropistic responses. We also highlight research done in a microgravity environment in order to decouple two tropisms through experiments carried out in the absence of a significant unilateral gravity vector. In addition, alteration of gravity, especially the microgravity environment, and light irradiation produce important effects on meristematic cells, the undifferentiated, highly proliferating, totipotent cells which sustain plant development. Microgravity produces the disruption of meristematic competence, i.e., the decoupling of cell proliferation and cell growth, affecting the regulation of the cell cycle and ribosome biogenesis. Light irradiation, especially red light, mediated by phytochromes, has an activating effect on these processes. Phytohormones, particularly auxin, also are key mediators in these alterations. Upcoming experiments on the International Space Station will clarify some of the mechanisms and molecular players of the plant responses to these environmental signals involved in tropisms and the cell cycle.",2014,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4211383/
PMC5748516,A novel blue-light phototropic response is revealed in roots of ,Joshua P. Vandenbrink; Raul Herranz; F. Javier Medina; Richard E. Edelmann; John Z. Kiss,Arabidopsis; Fractional gravity; Microgravity; Phototropism; Reduced gravity; Spaceflight,0,"Due to their sessile nature, plants utilize environmental cues to grow and respond to their surroundings. Two of these cues, light and gravity, play a substantial role in plant orientation and directed growth movements (tropisms). However, very little is currently known about the interaction between light- (phototropic) and gravity (gravitropic)-mediated growth responses. Utilizing the European Modular Cultivation System on board the International Space Station, we investigated the interaction between phototropic and gravitropic responses in three",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5748516/
PMC5821596,Comparative transcriptomics indicate changes in cell wall organization and stress response in seedlings during spaceflight,Christina M. Johnson; Aswati Subramanian; Sivakumar Pattathil; Melanie J. Correll; John Z. Kiss,cell wall; cytoskeleton; dehydration; glycome profiling; transcriptome; heat shock; XERO1; FH2; AGP; XTH,0,"Plants will play an important role in the future of space exploration as part of bioregenerative life support. Thus, it is important to understand the effects of microgravity and spaceflight on gene expression in plant development. We analyzed the transcriptome of In our BRIC-16 experiments, we noted expression changes in genes involved in hypoxia and heat shock responses, DNA repair, and cell wall structure between spaceflight samples compared to the ground controls. In addition, glycome profiling supported our expression analyses in that there was a difference in cell wall components between ground control and spaceflight-grown plants. Comparing our studies to those of the other BRIC-16 experiments demonstrated that, even with the same hardware and similar biological materials, differences in results in gene expression were found among these spaceflight experiments. A common theme from our BRIC-16 space experiments and those of the other two groups was the downregulation of water stress response genes in spaceflight. In addition, all three studies found differential regulation of genes associated with cell wall remodeling and stress responses between spaceflight-grown and ground control plants.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5821596/
PMC6889863,RNAseq Analysis of the Response of ,Raúl Herranz; Joshua P. Vandenbrink; Alicia Villacampa; Aránzazu Manzano; William L. Poehlman; Frank Alex Feltus; John Z. Kiss; Francisco Javier Medina,Arabidopsis; fractional gravity; microgravity; stress response; RNA-Seq; spaceflight,52,N/A,2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6889863/
PMC6908503,Comparison of Microgravity Analogs to Spaceflight in Studies of Plant Growth and Development,John Z. Kiss; Chris Wolverton; Sarah E. Wyatt; Karl H. Hasenstein; Jack J.W.A. van Loon,clinostat; plant growth; simulated microgravity; random positioning machine; reduced gravity; spaceflight experiments,76,"Life on Earth has evolved under the influence of gravity. This force has played an important role in shaping development and morphology from the molecular level to the whole organism. Although aquatic life experiences reduced gravity effects, land plants have evolved under a 1-",2019,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6908503/
PMC7607443,The Importance of Earth Reference Controls in Spaceflight -Omics Research: Characterization of Nucleolin Mutants from the Seedling Growth Experiments,Aránzazu Manzano; Alicia Villacampa; Julio Sáez-Vásquez; John Z. Kiss; F. Javier Medina; Raúl Herranz,Plant Biology; Omics; Space Sciences; Arabidopsis; Ground controls; Nucleolus; Stress response; RNA-Seq; Spaceflight,53,"Understanding plant adaptive responses to the space environment is a requisite for enabling space farming. Spaceflight produces deleterious effects on plant cells, particularly affecting ribosome biogenesis, a complex stress-sensitive process coordinated with cell division and differentiation, known to be activated by red light. Here, in a series of ground studies, we have used mutants from the two",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7607443/
PMC10764921,Effects of altered gravity on growth and morphology in ,Leone Ermes Romano; Jack J. W. A. van Loon; Luigi Gennaro Izzo; Maurizio Iovane; Giovanna Aronne,Plant sciences; Light responses; Photosynthesis; Plant development,48,Understanding the response of plants to varied gravitational conditions is vital for developing effective food production in space bioregenerative life support systems. This study examines the impact of altered gravity conditions on the growth and morphological responses of,2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10764921/
PMC9605285,Red Light Enhances Plant Adaptation to Spaceflight and Mars ,Francisco-Javier Medina; Aránzazu Manzano; Raúl Herranz; John Z. Kiss,light; microgravity; plant growth; root meristem; spaceflight; transcriptomics,80,"Understanding how plants respond and adapt to extraterrestrial conditions is essential for space exploration initiatives. Deleterious effects of the space environment on plant development have been reported, such as the unbalance of cell growth and proliferation in the root meristem, or gene expression reprogramming. However, plants are capable of surviving and completing the seed-to-seed life cycle under microgravity. A key research challenge is to identify environmental cues, such as light, which could compensate the negative effects of microgravity. Understanding the crosstalk between light and gravity sensing in space was the major objective of the NASA-ESA Seedling Growth series of spaceflight experiments (2013–2018). Different",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9605285/
PMC3962621,EUK-134 ameliorates nNOSμ translocation and skeletal muscle fiber atrophy during short-term mechanical unloading,John M. Lawler; Mary Kunst; Jeff M. Hord; Yang Lee; Kumar Joshi; Rachel E. Botchlett; Angelo Ramirez; Daniel A. Martinez,atrophy; disuse; skeletal muscle; nNOS; oxidative stress; FoxO3a,0,"Reduced mechanical loading during bedrest, spaceflight, and casting, causes rapid morphological changes in skeletal muscle: fiber atrophy and reduction of slow-twitch fibers. An emerging signaling event in response to unloading is the translocation of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOSμ) from the sarcolemma to the cytosol. We used EUK-134, a cell-permeable mimetic of superoxide dismutase and catalase, to test the role of redox signaling in nNOSμ translocation and muscle fiber atrophy as a result of short-term (54 h) hindlimb unloading. Fischer-344 rats were divided into ambulatory control, hindlimb-unloaded (HU), and hindlimb-unloaded + EUK-134 (HU-EUK) groups. EUK-134 mitigated the unloading-induced phenotype, including muscle fiber atrophy and muscle fiber-type shift from slow to fast. nNOSμ immunolocalization at the sarcolemma of the soleus was reduced with HU, while nNOSμ protein content in the cytosol increased with unloading. Translocation of nNOS from the sarcolemma to cytosol was virtually abolished by EUK-134. EUK-134 also mitigated dephosphorylation at Thr-32 of FoxO3a during HU. Hindlimb unloading elevated oxidative stress (4-hydroxynonenal) and increased sarcolemmal localization of Nox2 subunits gp91phox (Nox2) and p47phox, effects normalized by EUK-134. Thus, our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that oxidative stress triggers nNOSμ translocation from the sarcolemma and FoxO3a dephosphorylation as an early event during mechanical unloading. Thus, redox signaling may serve as a biological switch for nNOS to initiate morphological changes in skeletal muscle fibers.",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3962621/
PMC4462657,MnSOD Overexpression Reduces Fibrosis and Pro-Apoptotic Signaling in the Aging Mouse Heart,Hyo-Bum Kwak; Yang Lee; Jong-Hee Kim; Holly Van Remmen; Arlan G. Richardson; John M. Lawler,Aging; Heart; Superoxide dismutase; Oxidative stress; Fibrosis.,0,"Contractility of the heart is impaired with advancing age via mechanical remodeling, as myocytes are lost through apoptosis and collagenous fibers accumulate. Exercise training confers protection against fibrosis and apoptosis in the aging heart, but the mechanisms remain poorly understood. We recently reported that exercise training elevates Mn isoform of superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) in the aging heart, concomitant with reduction in oxidative stress and fibrosis. Here, we tested the hypothesis that overexpression of MnSOD would be causal in protection against fibrosis and apoptosis in the aging heart. Hearts were extracted from young (8 months) wild-type, young mice overexpressing the",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4462657/
PMC5026643,Lifelong Wheel Running Exercise and Mild Caloric Restriction Attenuate Nuclear EndoG in the Aging Plantaris Muscle,Jong-Hee Kim; Yang Lee; Hyo-Bum Kwak; John M. Lawler,EndoG; HSP27; aging; caloric restriction; wheel running; exercise,0,"Apoptosis plays an important role in atrophy and sarcopenia in skeletal muscle. Recent evidence suggests that insufficient heat shock proteins (HSPs) may contribute to apoptosis and muscle wasting. In addition, long-term caloric restriction (CR) and lifelong wheel running exercise (WR) with CR provide significant protection against caspase-dependent apoptosis and sarcopenia. Caspase-independent mediators (endonuclease G: EndoG; apoptosis-inducing factor: AIF) of apoptosis are also linked to muscles wasting with disuse and aging. However, the efficacy of CR and WR with CR to attenuate caspase-independent apoptosis and preserve HSPs in aging skeletal muscle are unknown. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that CR and WR with CR would ameliorate age-induced elevation of EndoG and AIF while protecting HSP27 and HSP70 levels in the plantaris. Male Fischer-344 rats were divided into 4 groups at 11 weeks:",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5026643/
PMC5026642,Age-related alterations in the sarcolemmal environment are attenuated by lifelong caloric restriction and voluntary exercise,Jeffrey M. Hord; Rachel Botchlett; John M. Lawler,Sarcopenia; Aging Muscle; Calorie Restriction; Exercise; Wheel Running; Sarcolemma,0,"Age-related loss of skeletal muscle mass and function, referred to as sarcopenia, is mitigated by lifelong calorie restriction as well as exercise. In aged skeletal muscle fibers there is compromised integrity of the cell membrane that may contribute to sarcopenia. The purpose of this study was to determine if lifelong mild (8%) caloric restriction (CR) and lifelong CR + voluntary wheel running (WR) could ameliorate disruption of membrane scaffolding and signaling proteins during the aging process, thus maintaining a favorable, healthy membrane environment in plantaris muscle fibers. Fischer-344 rats were divided into four groups: 24-month old adults fed",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5026642/
PMC10342025,"The Impact of SRT2104 on Skeletal Muscle Mitochondrial Function, Redox Biology, and Loss of Muscle Mass in Hindlimb Unloaded Rats",Lauren T. Wesolowski; Jessica L. Simons; Pier L. Semanchik; Mariam A. Othman; Joo-Hyun Kim; John M. Lawler; Khaled Y. Kamal; Sarah H. White-Springer,hindlimb unloading; spaceflight; skeletal muscle; electron transfer system; SRT2104; mitochondria; respiration; oxidative stress; antioxidants,51,"Mechanical unloading during microgravity causes skeletal muscle atrophy and impairs mitochondrial energetics. The elevated production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by mitochondria and Nox2, coupled with impairment of stress protection (e.g., SIRT1, antioxidant enzymes), contribute to atrophy. We tested the hypothesis that the SIRT1 activator, SRT2104 would rescue unloading-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. Mitochondrial function in rat gastrocnemius and soleus muscles were evaluated under three conditions (10 days): ambulatory control (CON), hindlimb unloaded (HU), and hindlimb-unloaded-treated with SRT2104 (SIRT). Oxidative phosphorylation, electron transfer capacities, H",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10342025/
PMC11167039,Bioreactor development for skeletal muscle hypertrophy and atrophy by manipulating uniaxial cyclic strain: proof of concept,Khaled Y. Kamal; Mariam Atef Othman; Joo-Hyun Kim; John M. Lawler,Cell biology; Physiology,74,"Skeletal muscles overcome terrestrial, gravitational loading by producing tensile forces that produce movement through joint rotation. Conversely, the microgravity of spaceflight reduces tensile loads in working skeletal muscles, causing an adaptive muscle atrophy. Unfortunately, the design of stable, physiological bioreactors to model skeletal muscle tensile loading during spaceflight experiments remains challenging. Here, we tested a bioreactor that uses initiation and cessation of cyclic, tensile strain to induce hypertrophy and atrophy, respectively, in murine lineage (C2C12) skeletal muscle myotubes. Uniaxial cyclic stretch of myotubes was conducted using a StrexCell® (STB-1400) stepper motor system (0.75 Hz, 12% strain, 60 min day^-1). Myotube groups were assigned as follows: (a) quiescent over 2- or (b) 5-day (no stretch), (c) experienced 2-days (2dHY) or (d) 5-days (5dHY) of cyclic stretch, or (e) 2-days of cyclic stretch followed by a 3-day cessation of stretch (3dAT). Using ß-sarcoglycan as a sarcolemmal marker, mean myotube diameter increased significantly following 2dAT (51%) and 5dAT (94%) vs. matched controls. The hypertrophic, anabolic markers talin and Akt phosphorylation (Thr308) were elevated with 2dHY but not in 3dAT myotubes. Inflammatory, catabolic markers IL-1ß, IL6, and NF-kappaB p65 subunit were significantly higher in the 3dAT group vs. all other groups. The ratio of phosphorylated FoxO3a/total FoxO3a was significantly lower in 3dAT than in the 2dHY group, consistent with elevated catabolic signaling during unloading. In summary, we demonstrated proof-of-concept for a spaceflight research bioreactor, using uniaxial cyclic stretch to produce myotube hypertrophy with increased tensile loading, and myotube atrophy with subsequent cessation of stretch.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11167039/
PMC10020673,Microbial isolation and characterization from two flex lines from the urine processor assembly onboard the international space station,Hang Ngoc Nguyen; G. Marie Sharp; Sarah Stahl-Rommel; Yo-Ann Velez Justiniano; Christian L. Castro; Mayra Nelman-Gonzalez; Aubrie O’Rourke; Michael D. Lee; Jill Williamson; Chelsea McCool; Brian Crucian; Kenneth W. Clark; Miten Jain; Sarah L. Castro-Wallace,Spaceflight; Biofilms; Environmental microbiology; International space station; Pangenome,73,"Urine, humidity condensate, and other sources of non-potable water are processed onboard the International Space Station (ISS) by the Water Recovery System (WRS) yielding potable water. While some means of microbial control are in place, including a phosphoric acid/hexavalent chromium urine pretreatment solution, many areas within the WRS are not available for routine microbial monitoring. Due to refurbishment needs, two flex lines from the Urine Processor Assembly (UPA) within the WRS were removed and returned to Earth. The water from within these lines, as well as flush water, was microbially evaluated. Culture and culture-independent analysis revealed the presence of",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10020673/
PMC9144607,CAMDLES: CFD-DEM Simulation of Microbial Communities in Spaceflight and Artificial Microgravity,Rocky An; Jessica Audrey Lee,microgravity; clinostat; rotating wall vessel; microbial community; population dynamics; computational fluid dynamics; CFD-DEM,63,"We present CAMDLES (CFD-DEM Artificial Microgravity Developments for Living Ecosystem Simulation), an extension of CFDEM",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9144607/
PMC7314936,Hardware Validation of the Advanced Plant Habitat on ISS: Canopy Photosynthesis in Reduced Gravity,Oscar Monje; Jeffrey T. Richards; John A. Carver; Dinah I. Dimapilis; Howard G. Levine; Nicole F. Dufour; Bryan G. Onate,Apogee Wheat; canopy photosynthesis; controlled environment agriculture; elevated CO; ISS spaceflight environment; NASA APH; microgravity,33,"The Advanced Plant Habitat (APH) is the largest research plant growth facility deployed on the International Space Station (ISS). APH is a fully enclosed, closed-loop plant life support system with an environmentally controlled growth chamber designed for conducting both fundamental and applied plant research during experiments extending as long as 135 days. APH was delivered to the ISS in parts aboard two commercial resupply missions: OA-7 in April 2017 and SpaceX-11 in June 2017, and was assembled and installed in the Japanese Experiment Module Kibo in November 2018. We report here on a 7-week-long hardware validation test that utilized a root module planted with both",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7314936/
PMC4340379,Trimeric Structure of (+)-Pinoresinol-forming Dirigent Protein at 1.95 Å Resolution with Three Isolated Active Sites,Kye-Won Kim; Clyde A. Smith; Michael D. Daily; John R. Cort; Laurence B. Davin; Norman G. Lewis,Crystallography; Homology Modeling; Molecular Docking; Protein Crystallization; Secondary Metabolism; Dirigent Proteins; Phenoxy Radical Radical Coupling,40,N/A,2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4340379/
PMC5933128,Reduced Arogenate Dehydratase Expression: Ramifications for Photosynthesis and Metabolism,Ricarda Höhner; Joaquim V. Marques; Tetsuro Ito; Yoshiaki Amakura; Alan D. Budgeon; Karl Weitz; Kim K. Hixson; Laurence B. Davin; Helmut Kirchhoff; Norman G. Lewis,N/A,0,"Modulation of arogenate dehydratase in Arabidopsis causes changes in secondary metabolism, transient overaccumulation of starch, and lower photosynthetic electron transport rates.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5933128/
PMC8185232,New Insights Into Lignification via Network and Multi-Omics Analyses of Arogenate Dehydratase Knock-Out Mutants in ,Kim K. Hixson; Joaquim V. Marques; Jason P. Wendler; Jason E. McDermott; Karl K. Weitz; Therese R. Clauss; Matthew E. Monroe; Ronald J. Moore; Joseph Brown; Mary S. Lipton; Callum J. Bell; Ljiljana Paša-Tolić; Laurence B. Davin; Norman G. Lewis,lignin; arogenate dehydratases; multi-omics; network analysis; ribocode,64,Multiple,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8185232/
PMC3936501,Functional Consequences of Radiation-Induced Oxidative Stress in Cultured Neural Stem Cells and the Brain Exposed to Charged Particle Irradiation,Bertrand P. Tseng; Erich Giedzinski; Atefeh Izadi; Tatiana Suarez; Mary L. Lan; Katherine K. Tran; Munjal M. Acharya; Gregory A. Nelson; Jacob Raber; Vipan K. Parihar; Charles L. Limoli,N/A,0,N/A,2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3936501/
PMC11998595,The Last Mile in Beta-Cell Replacement Therapy for Type 1 Diabetes: Time to Grow Up,Lorenzo Piemonti,diabetes type 1; beta cell replacement therapy; islet; scalability; stem cell derived beta cells,51,"Beta cell replacement therapy for type 1 diabetes (T1D) is undergoing a transformative shift, driven by advances in stem cell biology, gene editing, and tissue engineering. While islet transplantation has demonstrated proof-of-concept success in restoring endogenous insulin production, its clinical impact remains limited by donor scarcity, immune rejection, and procedural complexities. The emergence of stem cell-derived beta-like cells represents a paradigm shift, with initial clinical trials showing promising insulin secretion",2025,discussion,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11998595/
PMC7996555,Network Analysis of Gene Transcriptions of ,Vidya Manian; Jairo Orozco; Harshini Gangapuram; Heeralal Janwa; Carlos Agrinsoni,gene expression; graphs; network analysis; root growth; cell wall biosynthesis; spaceflight microgravity,48,The transcriptomic datasets of the plant model organism,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7996555/
PMC8234954,Detection of Genes in ,Vidya Manian; Jairo Orozco-Sandoval; Victor Diaz-Martinez,ionizing radiation; topological and algebraic spectral network analysis; Pearson correlation; non-radiation-induced genes; Markov blanket; causal relation; logistic regression; Jaccard similarity index; flavonoids and carotenoids,61,Ionizing radiation present in extraterrestrial environment is an important factor that affects plants grown in spaceflight. Pearson correlation-based gene regulatory network inferencing from transcriptional responses of the plant,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8234954/
PMC4152162,"The effect of spaceflight on mouse olfactory bulb volume, neurogenesis, and cell death indicates the protective effect of novel environment",Sarah E. Latchney; Phillip D. Rivera; Xiao W. Mao; Virginia L. Ferguson; Ted A. Bateman; Louis S. Stodieck; Gregory A. Nelson; Amelia J. Eisch,low Earth orbit; environmental enrichment; neuroblasts; doublecortin; activated caspase-3,0,"Space missions necessitate physiological and psychological adaptations to environmental factors not present on Earth, some of which present significant risks for the central nervous system (CNS) of crewmembers. One CNS region of interest is the adult olfactory bulb (OB), as OB structure and function are sensitive to environmental- and experience-induced regulation. It is currently unknown how the OB is altered by spaceflight. In this study, we evaluated OB volume and neurogenesis in mice shortly after a 13-day flight on Space Shuttle Atlantis [Space Transport System (STS)-135] relative to two groups of control mice maintained on Earth. Mice housed on Earth in animal enclosure modules that mimicked the conditions onboard STS-135 (AEM-Ground mice) had greater OB volume relative to mice maintained in standard housing on Earth (Vivarium mice), particularly in the granule (GCL) and glomerular (GL) cell layers. AEM-Ground mice also had more OB neuroblasts and fewer apoptotic cells relative to Vivarium mice. However, the AEM-induced increase in OB volume and neurogenesis was not seen in STS-135 mice (AEM-Flight mice), suggesting that spaceflight may have negated the positive effects of the AEM. In fact, when OB volume of AEM-Flight mice was considered, there was a greater density of apoptotic cells relative to AEM-Ground mice. Our findings suggest that factors present during spaceflight have opposing effects on OB size and neurogenesis, and provide insight into potential strategies to preserve OB structure and function during future space missions.",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4152162/
PMC5498037,"Effects of low-dose rate γ-irradiation combined with simulated microgravity on markers of oxidative stress, DNA methylation potential, and remodeling in the mouse heart",John W. Seawright; Yusra Samman; Vijayalakshmi Sridharan; Xiao Wen Mao; Maohua Cao; Preeti Singh; Stepan Melnyk; Igor Koturbash; Gregory A. Nelson; Martin Hauer-Jensen; Marjan Boerma,N/A,66,"Space travel is associated with an exposure to low-dose rate ionizing radiation and the microgravity environment, both of which may lead to impairments in cardiac function. We used a mouse model to determine short- and long-term cardiac effects to simulated microgravity (hindlimb unloading; HU), continuous low-dose rate γ-irradiation, or a combination of HU and low-dose rate γ-irradiation. Cardiac tissue was obtained from female, C57BL/6J mice 7 days, 1 month, 4 months, and 9 months following the completion of a 21 day exposure to HU or a 21 day exposure to low-dose rate γ-irradiation (average dose rate of 0.01 cGy/h to a total of 0.04 Gy), or a 21 day simultaneous exposure to HU and low-dose rate γ-irradiation. Immunoblot analysis, rt-PCR, high-performance liquid chromatography, and histology were used to assess inflammatory cell infiltration, cardiac remodeling, oxidative stress, and the methylation potential of cardiac tissue in 3 to 6 animals per group. The combination of HU and γ-irradiation demonstrated the strongest increase in reduced to oxidized glutathione ratios 7 days and 1 month after treatment, but a difference was no longer apparent after 9 months. On the other hand, no significant changes in 4-hydroxynonenal adducts was seen in any of the groups, at the measured endpoints. While manganese superoxide dismutase protein levels decreased 9 months after low-dose γ-radiation, no changes were observed in expression of catalase or Nrf2, a transcription factor that determines the expression of several antioxidant enzymes, at the measured endpoints. Inflammatory marker, CD-2 protein content was significantly decreased in all groups 4 months after treatment. No significant differences were observed in α-smooth muscle cell actin protein content, collagen type III protein content or % total collagen. This study has provided the first and relatively broad analysis of small molecule and protein markers of oxidative stress, T-lymphocyte infiltration, and cardiac remodeling in response to HU with simultaneous exposure to low-dose rate γ-radiation. Results from the late observation time points suggest that the hearts had mostly recovered from these two experimental conditions. However, further research is needed with larger numbers of animals for a more robust statistical power to fully characterize the early and late effects of simulated microgravity combined with exposure to low-dose rate ionizing radiation on the heart.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5498037/
PMC6547757,Characterization of mouse ocular response to a 35-day spaceflight mission: Evidence of blood-retinal barrier disruption and ocular adaptations,Xiao W. Mao; Nina C. Nishiyama; Stephanie D. Byrum; Seta Stanbouly; Tamako Jones; Alyson Drew; Vijayalakshmi Sridharan; Marjan Boerma; Alan J. Tackett; David Zawieja; Jeffrey S. Willey; Michael Delp; Michael J. Pecaut,Proteomic analysis; Molecular neuroscience,47,"The health risks associated with spaceflight-induced ocular structural and functional damage has become a recent concern for NASA. The goal of the present study was to characterize the effects of spaceflight and reentry to 1 g on the structure and integrity of the retina and blood-retinal barrier (BRB) in the eye. To investigate possible mechanisms, changes in protein expression profiles were examined in mouse ocular tissue after spaceflight. Ten week old male C57BL/6 mice were launched to the International Space Station (ISS) on Space-X 12 at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on August, 2017. After a 35-day mission, mice were returned to Earth alive. Within 38 +/− 4 hours of splashdown, mice were euthanized and ocular tissues were collected for analysis. Ground control (GC) and vivarium control mice were maintained on Earth in flight hardware or normal vivarium cages respectively. Repeated intraocular pressure (IOP) measurements were performed before the flight launch and re-measured before the mice were euthanized after splashdown. IOP was significantly lower in post-flight measurements compared to that of pre-flight (14.4–19.3 mmHg vs 16.3–20.3 mmHg) (p < 0.05) for the left eye. Flight group had significant apoptosis in the retina and retinal vascular endothelial cells compared to control groups (p < 0.05). Immunohistochemical analysis of the retina revealed that an increased expression of aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) in the flight mice compared to controls gave strong indication of disturbance of BRB integrity. There were also a significant increase in the expression of platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) and a decrease in the expression of the BRB-related tight junction protein, Zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1). Proteomic analysis showed that many key proteins and pathways responsible for cell death, cell cycle, immune response, mitochondrial function and metabolic stress were significantly altered in the flight mice compared to ground control animals. These data indicate a complex cellular response that may alter retina structure and BRB integrity following long-term spaceflight.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6547757/
PMC6747492,Mice Exposed to Combined Chronic Low-Dose Irradiation and Modeled Microgravity Develop Long-Term Neurological Sequelae,Eliah G. Overbey; Amber M. Paul; Willian A. da Silveira; Candice G.T. Tahimic; Sigrid S. Reinsch; Nathaniel Szewczyk; Seta Stanbouly; Charles Wang; Jonathan M. Galazka; Xiao Wen Mao,hindlimb unloading; chronic low-dose irradiation; brain; transcriptome,46,"Spaceflight poses many challenges for humans. Ground-based analogs typically focus on single parameters of spaceflight and their associated acute effects. This study assesses the long-term transcriptional effects following single and combination spaceflight analog conditions using the mouse model: simulated microgravity via hindlimb unloading (HLU) and/or low-dose γ-ray irradiation (LDR) for 21 days, followed by 4 months of readaptation. Changes in gene expression and epigenetic modifications in brain samples during readaptation were analyzed by whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing (RNA-seq) and reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS). The results showed minimal gene expression and cytosine methylation alterations at 4 months readaptation within single treatment conditions of HLU or LDR. In contrast, following combined HLU+LDR, gene expression and promoter methylation analyses showed multiple altered pathways involved in neurogenesis and neuroplasticity, the regulation of neuropeptides, and cellular signaling. In brief, neurological readaptation following combined chronic LDR and HLU is a dynamic process that involves pathways that regulate neuronal function and structure and may lead to late onset neurological sequelae.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6747492/
PMC6746706,"Spaceflight influences gene expression, photoreceptor integrity, and oxidative stress-related damage in the murine retina",Eliah G. Overbey; Willian Abraham da Silveira; Seta Stanbouly; Nina C. Nishiyama; Gina D. Roque-Torres; Michael J. Pecaut; David Carl Zawieja; Charles Wang; Jeffrey S. Willey; Michael D. Delp; Gary Hardiman; Xiao Wen Mao,Transcriptomics; Transcriptomics; RNA sequencing; Gene expression; Experimental models of disease,65,"Extended spaceflight has been shown to adversely affect astronaut visual acuity. The purpose of this study was to determine whether spaceflight alters gene expression profiles and induces oxidative damage in the retina. Ten week old adult C57BL/6 male mice were flown aboard the ISS for 35 days and returned to Earth alive. Ground control mice were maintained on Earth under identical environmental conditions. Within 38 (+/−4) hours after splashdown, mice ocular tissues were collected for analysis. RNA sequencing detected 600 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in murine spaceflight retinas, which were enriched for genes related to visual perception, the phototransduction pathway, and numerous retina and photoreceptor phenotype categories. Twelve DEGs were associated with retinitis pigmentosa, characterized by dystrophy of the photoreceptor layer rods and cones. Differentially expressed transcription factors indicated changes in chromatin structure, offering clues to the observed phenotypic changes. Immunofluorescence assays showed degradation of cone photoreceptors and increased retinal oxidative stress. Total retinal, retinal pigment epithelium, and choroid layer thickness were significantly lower after spaceflight. These results indicate that retinal performance may decrease over extended periods of spaceflight and cause visual impairment.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6746706/
PMC8400407,Evaluating Ocular Response in the Retina and Optic Nerve Head after Single and Fractionated High-Energy Protons,Xiao-Wen Mao; Seta Stanbouly; Tamako Jones; Gregory Nelson,space radiation; protons; mouse retina; optic nerve head; blood-retinal barrier; fractionation dose; apoptosis; oxidative stress,36,"There are serious concerns about possible late radiation damage to ocular tissue from prolonged space radiation exposure, and occupational and medical procedures. This study aimed to investigate the effects of whole-body high-energy proton exposure at a single dose on apoptosis, oxidative stress, and blood-retina barrier (BRB) integrity in the retina and optic nerve head (ONH) region and to compare these radiation-induced effects with those produced by fractionated dose. Six-month-old C57BL/6 male mice were either sham irradiated or received whole-body high energy proton irradiation at an acute single dose of 0.5 Gy or 12 equal dose fractions for a total dose of 0.5 Gy over twenty-five days. At four months following irradiation, mice were euthanized and ocular tissues were collected for histochemical analysis. Significant increases in the number of apoptotic cells were documented in the mouse retinas and ONHs that received proton radiation with a single or fractionated dose (",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8400407/
PMC9365836,Characterization of gene expression profiles in the mouse brain after 35 days of spaceflight mission,Jacob M. Holley; Seta Stanbouly; Michael J. Pecaut; Jeffrey S. Willey; Michael Delp; Xiao Wen Mao,Neuroscience; Chronic inflammation,93,"It has been proposed that neuroinflammatory response plays an important role in the neurovascular remodeling in the brain after stress. The goal of the present study was to characterize changes in the gene expression profiles associated with neuroinflammation, neuronal function, metabolism and stress in mouse brain tissue. Ten-week old male C57BL/6 mice were launched to the International Space Station (ISS) on SpaceX-12 for a 35-day mission. Within 38 ± 4 h of splashdown, mice were returned to Earth alive. Brain tissues were collected for analysis. A novel digital color-coded barcode counting technology (NanoString",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9365836/
PMC9547011,A multi-omics longitudinal study of the murine retinal response to chronic low-dose irradiation and simulated microgravity,Prachi Kothiyal; Greg Eley; Hari Ilangovan; Katherine A. Hoadley; S. Robin Elgart; Xiao W. Mao; Parastou Eslami,Retinal diseases; Epigenomics; Transcriptomics,70,"The space environment includes unique hazards like radiation and microgravity which can adversely affect biological systems. We assessed a multi-omics NASA GeneLab dataset where mice were hindlimb unloaded and/or gamma irradiated for 21 days followed by retinal analysis at 7 days, 1 month or 4 months post-exposure. We compared time-matched epigenomic and transcriptomic retinal profiles resulting in a total of 4178 differentially methylated loci or regions, and 457 differentially expressed genes. Highest correlation in methylation difference was seen across different conditions at the same time point. Nucleotide metabolism biological processes were enriched in all groups with activation at 1 month and suppression at 7 days and 4 months. Genes and processes related to Notch and Wnt signaling showed alterations 4 months post-exposure. A total of 23 genes showed significant changes in methylation and expression compared to unexposed controls, including genes involved in retinal function and inflammatory response. This multi-omics analysis interrogates the epigenomic and transcriptomic impacts of radiation and hindlimb unloading on the retina in isolation and in combination and highlights important molecular mechanisms at different post-exposure stages.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9547011/
PMC10138634,Evidence of Spaceflight-Induced Adverse Effects on Photoreceptors and Retinal Function in the Mouse Eye,Xiaowen Mao; Seta Stanbouly; Jacob Holley; Michael Pecaut; James Crapo,spaceflight; retina; photoreceptor; oxidative stress; antioxidant,56,"The goal of the present study was to characterize acute oxidative damage in ocular structure and retinal function after exposure to spaceflight, and to evaluate the efficacy of an antioxidant in reducing spaceflight-induced changes in the retina. Ten-week-old adult C57BL/6 male mice were flown aboard the ISS on Space-X 24 over 35 days, and returned to Earth alive. The mice received a weekly injection of a superoxide dismutase mimic, MnTnBuOE-2-PyP 5+ (BuOE), before launch and during their stay onboard the ISS. Ground control mice were maintained on Earth under identical environmental conditions. Before the launch, intraocular pressure (IOP) was measured using a handheld tonometer and retinal function was evaluated using electroretinogram (ERG). ERG signals were recorded when the mouse eye was under dark-adapted conditions in response to ultraviolet monochromatic light flashes. Within 20 h after splashdown, IOP and ERG assessments were repeated before euthanasia. There were significant increases in body weight for habitat control groups post-flight compared to pre-flight measurements. However, the body weights were similar among flight groups before launch and after splashdown. The IOP measurements were similar between pre- and post-flight groups with no significant differences between BuOE-treated and saline controls. Immunofluorescence evaluation showed increases in retinal oxidative stress and apoptotic cell death after spaceflight. BuOE treatment significantly decreased the level of the oxidative stress biomarker. ERG data showed that the average amplitudes of the a- and b-wave were significantly decreased (39% and 32% by spaceflight, respectively) compared to that of habitat ground controls. These data indicate that spaceflight conditions induce oxidative stress in the retina, which may lead to photoreceptor cell damage and retinal function impairment.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10138634/
PMC12031868,Disturbances in human position sense during alterations in gravity: a parabolic flight experiment,Bernhard M. Weber; Michael Panzirsch; Benedikt Pleintinger; Martin Stelzer; Stella Arand; Christian Schöttler; Ralph Bayer; Annette Hagengruber; Uwe Proske,Position sense; Proprioception; Microgravity; Hypergravity; Parabolic flight,25,"Under conditions of weightlessness human position sense appears to deteriorate. This was tested, employing three methods of measurement: two-arm matching, one-arm pointing and one-arm repositioning, carried out during parabolic flight. In hypergravity (1.8G), position sense errors in a matching task increased significantly from the value during horizontal flight (1G) of + 2.5° (± 3.8° SD), to + 3.5° (± 3.3°). For pointing, errors increased significantly from + 9.1° (± 4.4°) to + 11.2° (± 4.4°). In microgravity (0G), matching errors fell significantly to + 0.35° (± 3.5°), while in pointing the fall was not significant. For repositioning, there were no significant changes in errors in either hypergravity or microgravity. It is proposed that the errors in matching and pointing are a consequence of the force of gravity acting at the elbow joint to alter the position signal coming from muscle and joint receptors. For repositioning, memory of the test angle was stored centrally, to be reproduced independently of any changes in gravity.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12031868/
PMC9583032,Routine omics collection is a golden opportunity for European human research in space and analog environments,Henry Cope; Craig R.G. Willis; Matthew J. MacKay; Lindsay A. Rutter; Li Shean Toh; Philip M. Williams; Raúl Herranz; Joseph Borg; Daniela Bezdan; Stefania Giacomello; Masafumi Muratani; Christopher E. Mason; Timothy Etheridge; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk,multiomics; European Space Agency; commercial spaceflight; personalized medicine; International Space Station; longitudinal monitoring; GDPR; astronaut ethics; biobank; artificial intelligence,135,"Widespread generation and analysis of omics data have revolutionized molecular medicine on Earth, yet its power to yield new mechanistic insights and improve occupational health during spaceflight is still to be fully realized in humans. Nevertheless, rapid technological advancements and ever-regular spaceflight programs mean that longitudinal, standardized, and cost-effective collection of human space omics data are firmly within reach. Here, we consider the practicality and scientific return of different sampling methods and omic types in the context of human spaceflight. We also appraise ethical and legal considerations pertinent to omics data derived from European astronauts and spaceflight participants (SFPs). Ultimately, we propose that a routine omics collection program in spaceflight and analog environments presents a golden opportunity. Unlocking this bright future of artificial intelligence (AI)-driven analyses and personalized medicine approaches will require further investigation into best practices, including policy design and standardization of omics data, metadata, and sampling methods.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9583032/
PMC9746133,Spatial omics technologies at multimodal and single cell/subcellular level,Jiwoon Park; Junbum Kim; Tyler Lewy; Charles M. Rice; Olivier Elemento; André F. Rendeiro; Christopher E. Mason,N/A,123,"Spatial omics technologies enable a deeper understanding of cellular organizations and interactions within a tissue of interest. These assays can identify specific compartments or regions in a tissue with differential transcript or protein abundance, delineate their interactions, and complement other methods in defining cellular phenotypes. A variety of spatial methodologies are being developed and commercialized; however, these techniques differ in spatial resolution, multiplexing capability, scale/throughput, and coverage. Here, we review the current and prospective landscape of single cell to subcellular resolution spatial omics technologies and analysis tools to provide a comprehensive picture for both research and clinical applications. The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13059-022-02824-6.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9746133/
PMC10422843,Genomic characterization and radiation tolerance of ,Patrick Leo; Marcus de Melo Texeira; Atul M. Chander; Nitin K. Singh; Anna C. Simpson; Andrey Yurkov; Fathi Karouia; Jason E. Stajich; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,2 new species; Mars 2020 mission; NASA cleanrooms; UV resistance; Extremophiles,107,"During the construction and assembly of the Mars 2020 mission components at two different NASA cleanrooms, several fungal strains were isolated. Based on their colony morphology, two strains that showed yeast-like appearance were further characterized for their phylogenetic position. The species-level classification of these two novel strains, using traditional colony and cell morphology methods combined with the phylogenetic reconstructions using multi-locus sequence analysis (MLSA) based on several gene loci (ITS, LSU, SSU, The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s43008-023-00119-4.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10422843/
PMC11022651,"Genome and clonal hematopoiesis stability contrasts with immune, cfDNA, mitochondrial, and telomere length changes during short duration spaceflight",J Sebastian Garcia-Medina; Karolina Sienkiewicz; S Anand Narayanan; Eliah G Overbey; Kirill Grigorev; Krista A Ryon; Marissa Burke; Jacqueline Proszynski; Braden Tierney; Caleb M Schmidt; Nuria Mencia-Trinchant; Remi Klotz; Veronica Ortiz; Jonathan Foox; Christopher Chin; Deena Najjar; Irina Matei; Irenaeus Chan; Carlos Cruchaga; Ashley Kleinman; JangKeun Kim; Alexander Lucaci; Conor Loy; Omary Mzava; Iwijn De Vlaminck; Anvita Singaraju; Lynn E Taylor; Julian C Schmidt; Michael A Schmidt; Kelly Blease; Juan Moreno; Andrew Boddicker; Junhua Zhao; Bryan Lajoie; Andrew Altomare; Semyon Kruglyak; Shawn Levy; Min Yu; Duane C Hassane; Susan M Bailey; Kelly Bolton; Jaime Mateus; Christopher E Mason,genomes; clonal; hematopoiesis; stability; immune; mitochondria; ribosomes; spaceflight,51,"The Inspiration4 (I4) mission, the first all-civilian orbital flight mission, investigated the physiological effects of short-duration spaceflight through a multi-omic approach. Despite advances, there remains much to learn about human adaptation to spaceflight's unique challenges, including microgravity, immune system perturbations, and radiation exposure. To provide a detailed genetics analysis of the mission, we collected dried blood spots pre-, during, and post-flight for DNA extraction. Telomere length was measured by quantitative PCR, while whole genome and cfDNA sequencing provided insight into genomic stability and immune adaptations. A robust bioinformatic pipeline was used for data analysis, including variant calling to assess mutational burden. Telomere elongation occurred during spaceflight and shortened after return to Earth. Cell-free DNA analysis revealed increased immune cell signatures post-flight. No significant clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP) or whole-genome instability was observed. The long-term gene expression changes across immune cells suggested cellular adaptations to the space environment persisting months post-flight. Our findings provide valuable insights into the physiological consequences of short-duration spaceflight, with telomere dynamics and immune cell gene expression adapting to spaceflight and persisting after return to Earth. CHIP sequencing data will serve as a reference point for studying the early development of CHIP in astronauts, an understudied phenomenon as previous studies have focused on career astronauts. This study will serve as a reference point for future commercial and non-commercial spaceflight, low Earth orbit (LEO) missions, and deep-space exploration.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11022651/
PMC11094041,Inspiration4 data access through the NASA Open Science Data Repository,Lauren M. Sanders; Kirill A. Grigorev; Ryan T. Scott; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; San-huei Lai Polo; Rachel Gilbert; Eliah G. Overbey; JangKeun Kim; Christopher E. Mason; Sylvain V. Costes,Computational biology and bioinformatics; Biological techniques,11,"The increasing accessibility of commercial and private space travel necessitates a profound understanding of its impact on human health. The NASA Open Science Data Repository (OSDR) provides transparent and FAIR access to biological studies, notably the SpaceX Inspiration4 (I4) mission, which amassed extensive data from civilian astronauts. This dataset encompasses omics and clinical assays, facilitating comprehensive research on space-induced biological responses. These data allow for multi-modal, longitudinal assessments, bridging the gap between human and model organism studies. Crucially, community-driven data standards established by NASA’s OSDR Analysis Working Groups empower artificial intelligence and machine learning to glean invaluable insights, guiding future mission planning and health risk mitigation. This article presents a concise guide to access and analyze I4 data in OSDR, including programmatic access through GLOpenAPI. This pioneering effort establishes a precedent for post-mission health monitoring programs within space agencies, propelling research in the burgeoning field of commercial space travel’s impact on human physiology.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11094041/
PMC11357997,Molecular and physiological changes in the SpaceX Inspiration4 civilian crew,Christopher W. Jones; Eliah G. Overbey; Jerome Lacombe; Adrian J. Ecker; Cem Meydan; Krista Ryon; Braden Tierney; Namita Damle; Matthew MacKay; Evan E. Afshin; Jonathan Foox; Jiwoon Park; Theodore M. Nelson; Mir Suhail Mohamad; Syed Gufran Ahmad Byhaqui; Burhan Aslam; Ummer Akbar Tali; Liaqun Nisa; Priya V. Menon; Chintan O. Patel; Sharib A. Khan; Doug J. Ebert; Aaron Everson; Michael C. Schubert; Nabila N. Ali; Mallika S. Sarma; JangKeun Kim; Nadia Houerbi; Kirill Grigorev; J. Sebastian Garcia Medina; Alexander J. Summers; Jian Gu; John A. Altin; Ali Fattahi; Mohammad I. Hirzallah; Jimmy H. Wu; Alexander C. Stahn; Afshin Beheshti; Remi Klotz; Veronica Ortiz; Min Yu; Laura Patras; Irina Matei; David Lyden; Ari Melnick; Neil Banerjee; Sean Mullane; Ashley S. Kleinman; Michael Loesche; Anil S. Menon; Dorit B. Donoviel; Emmanuel Urquieta; Jaime Mateus; Ashot E. Sargsyan; Mark Shelhamer; Frederic Zenhausern; Eric M. Bershad; Mathias Basner; Christopher E. Mason,Physiology; Molecular biology; Cognitive neuroscience; Oculomotor system; Visual system,72,"Human spaceflight has historically been managed by government agencies, such as in the NASA Twins Study",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11357997/
PMC11167063,Telomeric RNA (TERRA) increases in response to spaceflight and high-altitude climbing,Taghreed M. Al-Turki; David G. Maranon; Christopher B. Nelson; Aidan M. Lewis; Jared J. Luxton; Lynn E. Taylor; Noelia Altina; Fei Wu; Huixun Du; JangKeun Kim; Namita Damle; Eliah Overbey; Cem Meydan; Kirill Grigorev; Daniel A. Winer; David Furman; Christopher E. Mason; Susan M. Bailey,Genetics; Molecular biology,109,"Telomeres are repetitive nucleoprotein complexes at chromosomal termini essential for maintaining genome stability. Telomeric RNA, or TERRA, is a previously presumed long noncoding RNA of heterogeneous lengths that contributes to end-capping structure and function, and facilitates telomeric recombination in tumors that maintain telomere length via the telomerase-independent Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) pathway. Here, we investigated TERRA in the radiation-induced DNA damage response (DDR) across astronauts, high-altitude climbers, healthy donors, and cellular models. Similar to astronauts in the space radiation environment and climbers of Mt. Everest, in vitro radiation exposure prompted increased transcription of TERRA, while simulated microgravity did not. Data suggest a specific TERRA DDR to telomeric double-strand breaks (DSBs), and provide direct demonstration of hybridized TERRA at telomere-specific DSB sites, indicative of protective TERRA:telomeric DNA hybrid formation. Targeted telomeric DSBs also resulted in accumulation of TERRA foci in G2-phase, supportive of TERRA’s role in facilitating recombination-mediated telomere elongation. Results have important implications for scenarios involving persistent telomeric DNA damage, such as those associated with chronic oxidative stress (e.g., aging, systemic inflammation, environmental and occupational radiation exposures), which can trigger transient ALT in normal human cells, as well as for targeting TERRA as a therapeutic strategy against ALT-positive tumors.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11167063/
PMC11166909,Spatial multi-omics of human skin reveals KRAS and inflammatory responses to spaceflight,Jiwoon Park; Eliah G. Overbey; S. Anand Narayanan; JangKeun Kim; Braden T. Tierney; Namita Damle; Deena Najjar; Krista A. Ryon; Jacqueline Proszynski; Ashley Kleinman; Jeremy Wain Hirschberg; Matthew MacKay; Evan E. Afshin; Richard Granstein; Justin Gurvitch; Briana M. Hudson; Aric Rininger; Sean Mullane; Sarah E. Church; Cem Meydan; George Church; Afshin Beheshti; Jaime Mateus; Christopher E. Mason,Computational models; Image processing; Outcomes research; Risk factors; Systems analysis,85,"Spaceflight can change metabolic, immunological, and biological homeostasis and cause skin rashes and irritation, yet the molecular basis remains unclear. To investigate the impact of short-duration spaceflight on the skin, we conducted skin biopsies on the Inspiration4 crew members before (L-44) and after (R + 1) flight. Leveraging multi-omics assays including GeoMx™ Digital Spatial Profiler, single-cell RNA/ATAC-seq, and metagenomics/metatranscriptomics, we assessed spatial gene expressions and associated microbial and immune changes across 95 skin regions in four compartments: outer epidermis, inner epidermis, outer dermis, and vasculature. Post-flight samples showed significant up-regulation of genes related to inflammation and KRAS signaling across all skin regions. These spaceflight-associated changes mapped to specific cellular responses, including altered interferon responses, DNA damage, epithelial barrier disruptions, T-cell migration, and hindered regeneration were located primarily in outer tissue compartments. We also linked epithelial disruption to microbial shifts in skin swab and immune cell activity to PBMC single-cell data from the same crew and timepoints. Our findings present the inaugural collection and examination of astronaut skin, offering insights for future space missions and response countermeasures.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166909/
PMC11222149,Longitudinal multi-omics analysis of host microbiome architecture and immune responses during short-term spaceflight,Braden T. Tierney; JangKeun Kim; Eliah G. Overbey; Krista A. Ryon; Jonathan Foox; Maria A. Sierra; Chandrima Bhattacharya; Namita Damle; Deena Najjar; Jiwoon Park; J. Sebastian Garcia Medina; Nadia Houerbi; Cem Meydan; Jeremy Wain Hirschberg; Jake Qiu; Ashley S. Kleinman; Gabriel A. Al-Ghalith; Matthew MacKay; Evan E. Afshin; Raja Dhir; Joseph Borg; Christine Gatt; Nicholas Brereton; Benjamin P. Readhead; Semir Beyaz; Kasthuri J. Venkateswaran; Kelly Wiseman; Juan Moreno; Andrew M. Boddicker; Junhua Zhao; Bryan R. Lajoie; Ryan T. Scott; Andrew Altomare; Semyon Kruglyak; Shawn Levy; George M. Church; Christopher E. Mason,Microbiome; Computational biology and bioinformatics; Medical research,76,"Maintenance of astronaut health during spaceflight will require monitoring and potentially modulating their microbiomes. However, documenting microbial shifts during spaceflight has been difficult due to mission constraints that lead to limited sampling and profiling. Here we executed a six-month longitudinal study to quantify the high-resolution human microbiome response to three days in orbit for four individuals. Using paired metagenomics and metatranscriptomics alongside single-nuclei immune cell profiling, we characterized time-dependent, multikingdom microbiome changes across 750 samples and 10 body sites before, during and after spaceflight at eight timepoints. We found that most alterations were transient across body sites; for example, viruses increased in skin sites mostly during flight. However, longer-term shifts were observed in the oral microbiome, including increased plaque-associated bacteria (for example,",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11222149/
PMC11166948,Spatiotemporal expression and control of haemoglobin in space,Josef Borg; Conor Loy; JangKeun Kim; Alfred Buhagiar; Christopher Chin; Namita Damle; Iwijn De Vlaminck; Alex Felice; Tammy Liu; Irina Matei; Cem Meydan; Masafumi Muratani; Omary Mzava; Eliah Overbey; Krista A. Ryon; Scott M. Smith; Braden T. Tierney; Guy Trudel; Sara R. Zwart; Afshin Beheshti; Christopher E. Mason; Joseph Borg,RNA; Genetics research; Anaemia; Transcriptomics; Erythropoiesis,60,"It is now widely recognised that the environment in space activates a diverse set of genes involved in regulating fundamental cellular pathways. This includes the activation of genes associated with blood homeostasis and erythropoiesis, with a particular emphasis on those involved in globin chain production. Haemoglobin biology provides an intriguing model for studying space omics, as it has been extensively explored at multiple -omic levels, spanning DNA, RNA, and protein analyses, in both experimental and clinical contexts. In this study, we examined the developmental expression of haemoglobin over time and space using a unique suite of multi-omic datasets available on NASA GeneLab, from the NASA Twins Study, the JAXA CFE study, and the Inspiration4 mission. Our findings reveal significant variations in globin gene expression corresponding to the distinct spatiotemporal characteristics of the collected samples. This study sheds light on the dynamic nature of globin gene regulation in response to the space environment and provides valuable insights into the broader implications of space omics research.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166948/
PMC11166952,"Single-cell multi-ome and immune profiles of the Inspiration4 crew reveal conserved, cell-type, and sex-specific responses to spaceflight",JangKeun Kim; Braden T. Tierney; Eliah G. Overbey; Ezequiel Dantas; Matias Fuentealba; Jiwoon Park; S. Anand Narayanan; Fei Wu; Deena Najjar; Christopher R. Chin; Cem Meydan; Conor Loy; Begum Mathyk; Remi Klotz; Veronica Ortiz; Khiem Nguyen; Krista A. Ryon; Namita Damle; Nadia Houerbi; Laura I. Patras; Nathan Schanzer; Gwyneth A. Hutchinson; Jonathan Foox; Chandrima Bhattacharya; Matthew Mackay; Evan E. Afshin; Jeremy Wain Hirschberg; Ashley S. Kleinman; Julian C. Schmidt; Caleb M. Schmidt; Michael A. Schmidt; Afshin Beheshti; Irina Matei; David Lyden; Sean Mullane; Amran Asadi; Joan S. Lenz; Omary Mzava; Min Yu; Saravanan Ganesan; Iwijn De Vlaminck; Ari M. Melnick; Darko Barisic; Daniel A. Winer; Sara R. Zwart; Brian E. Crucian; Scott M. Smith; Jaime Mateus; David Furman; Christopher E. Mason,Epigenomics; Immunogenetics,91,"Spaceflight induces an immune response in astronauts. To better characterize this effect, we generated single-cell, multi-ome, cell-free RNA (cfRNA), biochemical, and hematology data for the SpaceX Inspiration4 (I4) mission crew. We found that 18 cytokines/chemokines related to inflammation, aging, and muscle homeostasis changed after spaceflight. In I4 single-cell multi-omics data, we identified a “spaceflight signature” of gene expression characterized by enrichment in oxidative phosphorylation, UV response, immune function, and TCF21 pathways. We confirmed the presence of this signature in independent datasets, including the NASA Twins Study, the I4 skin spatial transcriptomics, and 817 NASA GeneLab mouse transcriptomes. Finally, we observed that (1) T cells showed an up-regulation of FOXP3, (2) MHC class I genes exhibited long-term suppression, and (3) infection-related immune pathways were associated with microbiome shifts. In summary, this study reveals conserved and distinct immune disruptions occurring and details a roadmap for potential countermeasures to preserve astronaut health.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166952/
PMC11166937,Single-cell analysis identifies conserved features of immune dysfunction in simulated microgravity and spaceflight,Fei Wu; Huixun Du; Eliah Overbey; JangKeun Kim; Priya Makhijani; Nicolas Martin; Chad A. Lerner; Khiem Nguyen; Jordan Baechle; Taylor R. Valentino; Matias Fuentealba; Juliet M. Bartleson; Heather Halaweh; Shawn Winer; Cem Meydan; Francine Garrett-Bakelman; Nazish Sayed; Simon Melov; Masafumi Muratani; Akos A. Gerencser; Herbert G. Kasler; Afshin Beheshti; Christopher E. Mason; David Furman; Daniel A. Winer,Adaptive immunity; Innate immunity; Gene regulation in immune cells; Space physics,90,"Microgravity is associated with immunological dysfunction, though the mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, using single-cell analysis of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) exposed to short term (25 hours) simulated microgravity, we characterize altered genes and pathways at basal and stimulated states with a Toll-like Receptor-7/8 agonist. We validate single-cell analysis by RNA sequencing and super-resolution microscopy, and against data from the Inspiration-4 (I4) mission, JAXA (Cell-Free Epigenome) mission, Twins study, and spleens from mice on the International Space Station. Overall, microgravity alters specific pathways for optimal immunity, including the cytoskeleton, interferon signaling, pyroptosis, temperature-shock, innate inflammation (e.g., Coronavirus pathogenesis pathway and IL-6 signaling), nuclear receptors, and sirtuin signaling. Microgravity directs monocyte inflammatory parameters, and impairs T cell and NK cell functionality. Using machine learning, we identify numerous compounds linking microgravity to immune cell transcription, and demonstrate that the flavonol, quercetin, can reverse most abnormal pathways. These results define immune cell alterations in microgravity, and provide opportunities for countermeasures to maintain normal immunity in space.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166937/
PMC11357981,The Space Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA) and international astronaut biobank,Eliah G. Overbey; JangKeun Kim; Braden T. Tierney; Jiwoon Park; Nadia Houerbi; Alexander G. Lucaci; Sebastian Garcia Medina; Namita Damle; Deena Najjar; Kirill Grigorev; Evan E. Afshin; Krista A. Ryon; Karolina Sienkiewicz; Laura Patras; Remi Klotz; Veronica Ortiz; Matthew MacKay; Annalise Schweickart; Christopher R. Chin; Maria A. Sierra; Matias F. Valenzuela; Ezequiel Dantas; Theodore M. Nelson; Egle Cekanaviciute; Gabriel Deards; Jonathan Foox; S. Anand Narayanan; Caleb M. Schmidt; Michael A. Schmidt; Julian C. Schmidt; Sean Mullane; Seth Stravers Tigchelaar; Steven Levitte; Craig Westover; Chandrima Bhattacharya; Serena Lucotti; Jeremy Wain Hirschberg; Jacqueline Proszynski; Marissa Burke; Ashley S. Kleinman; Daniel J. Butler; Conor Loy; Omary Mzava; Joan Lenz; Doru Paul; Christopher Mozsary; Lauren M. Sanders; Lynn E. Taylor; Chintan O. Patel; Sharib A. Khan; Mir Suhail Mohamad; Syed Gufran Ahmad Byhaqui; Burhan Aslam; Aaron S. Gajadhar; Lucy Williamson; Purvi Tandel; Qiu Yang; Jessica Chu; Ryan W. Benz; Asim Siddiqui; Daniel Hornburg; Kelly Blease; Juan Moreno; Andrew Boddicker; Junhua Zhao; Bryan Lajoie; Ryan T. Scott; Rachel R. Gilbert; San-huei Lai Polo; Andrew Altomare; Semyon Kruglyak; Shawn Levy; Ishara Ariyapala; Joanne Beer; Bingqing Zhang; Briana M. Hudson; Aric Rininger; Sarah E. Church; Afshin Beheshti; George M. Church; Scott M. Smith; Brian E. Crucian; Sara R. Zwart; Irina Matei; David C. Lyden; Francine Garrett-Bakelman; Jan Krumsiek; Qiuying Chen; Dawson Miller; Joe Shuga; Stephen Williams; Corey Nemec; Guy Trudel; Martin Pelchat; Odette Laneuville; Iwijn De Vlaminck; Steven Gross; Kelly L. Bolton; Susan M. Bailey; Richard Granstein; David Furman; Ari M. Melnick; Sylvain V. Costes; Bader Shirah; Min Yu; Anil S. Menon; Jaime Mateus; Cem Meydan; Christopher E. Mason,Molecular biology; Medical research; Genetics,42,"Spaceflight induces molecular, cellular and physiological shifts in astronauts and poses myriad biomedical challenges to the human body, which are becoming increasingly relevant as more humans venture into space",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11357981/
PMC11166969,"Secretome profiling reveals acute changes in oxidative stress, brain homeostasis, and coagulation following short-duration spaceflight",Nadia Houerbi; JangKeun Kim; Eliah G. Overbey; Richa Batra; Annalise Schweickart; Laura Patras; Serena Lucotti; Krista A. Ryon; Deena Najjar; Cem Meydan; Namita Damle; Christopher Chin; S. Anand Narayanan; Joseph W. Guarnieri; Gabrielle Widjaja; Afshin Beheshti; Gabriel Tobias; Fanny Vatter; Jeremy Wain Hirschberg; Ashley Kleinman; Evan E. Afshin; Matthew MacKay; Qiuying Chen; Dawson Miller; Aaron S. Gajadhar; Lucy Williamson; Purvi Tandel; Qiu Yang; Jessica Chu; Ryan Benz; Asim Siddiqui; Daniel Hornburg; Steven Gross; Bader Shirah; Jan Krumsiek; Jaime Mateus; Xiao Mao; Irina Matei; Christopher E. Mason,Epigenomics; Metabolomics,100,"As spaceflight becomes more common with commercial crews, blood-based measures of crew health can guide both astronaut biomedicine and countermeasures. By profiling plasma proteins, metabolites, and extracellular vesicles/particles (EVPs) from the SpaceX Inspiration4 crew, we generated “spaceflight secretome profiles,” which showed significant differences in coagulation, oxidative stress, and brain-enriched proteins. While >93% of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in vesicles and metabolites recovered within six months, the majority (73%) of plasma DAPs were still perturbed post-flight. Moreover, these proteomic alterations correlated better with peripheral blood mononuclear cells than whole blood, suggesting that immune cells contribute more DAPs than erythrocytes. Finally, to discern possible mechanisms leading to brain-enriched protein detection and blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption, we examined protein changes in dissected brains of spaceflight mice, which showed increases in PECAM-1, a marker of BBB integrity. These data highlight how even short-duration spaceflight can disrupt human and murine physiology and identify spaceflight biomarkers that can guide countermeasure development.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166969/
PMC11166943,Astronaut omics and the impact of space on the human body at scale,Lindsay A. Rutter; Henry Cope; Matthew J. MacKay; Raúl Herranz; Saswati Das; Sergey A. Ponomarev; Sylvain V. Costes; Amber M. Paul; Richard Barker; Deanne M. Taylor; Daniela Bezdan; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Masafumi Muratani; Christopher E. Mason; Stefania Giacomello,Gene expression; Medical genomics; Molecular medicine,106,"Future multi-year crewed planetary missions will motivate advances in aerospace nutrition and telehealth. On Earth, the Human Cell Atlas project aims to spatially map all cell types in the human body. Here, we propose that a parallel Human Cell Space Atlas could serve as an openly available, global resource for space life science research. As humanity becomes increasingly spacefaring, high-resolution omics on orbit could permit an advent of precision spaceflight healthcare. Alongside the scientific potential, we consider the complex ethical, cultural, and legal challenges intrinsic to the human space omics discipline, and how philosophical frameworks may benefit from international perspectives.",2024,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166943/
PMC11166967,Transcriptomics analysis reveals molecular alterations underpinning spaceflight dermatology,Henry Cope; Jonas Elsborg; Samuel Demharter; J. Tyson McDonald; Chiara Wernecke; Hari Parthasarathy; Hriday Unadkat; Mira Chatrathi; Jennifer Claudio; Sigrid Reinsch; Pinar Avci; Sara R. Zwart; Scott M. Smith; Martina Heer; Masafumi Muratani; Cem Meydan; Eliah Overbey; Jangkeun Kim; Christopher R. Chin; Jiwoon Park; Jonathan C. Schisler; Christopher E. Mason; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Craig R. G. Willis; Amr Salam; Afshin Beheshti,Systems biology; Skin diseases,139,"Spaceflight poses a unique set of challenges to humans and the hostile spaceflight environment can induce a wide range of increased health risks, including dermatological issues. The biology driving the frequency of skin issues in astronauts is currently not well understood. To address this issue, we used a systems biology approach utilizing NASA’s Open Science Data Repository (OSDR) on space flown murine transcriptomic datasets focused on the skin, biochemical profiles of 50 NASA astronauts and human transcriptomic datasets generated from blood and hair samples of JAXA astronauts, as well as blood samples obtained from the NASA Twins Study, and skin and blood samples from the first civilian commercial mission, Inspiration4. Key biological changes related to skin health, DNA damage & repair, and mitochondrial dysregulation are identified as potential drivers for skin health risks during spaceflight. Additionally, a machine learning model is utilized to determine gene pairings associated with spaceflight response in the skin. While we identified spaceflight-induced dysregulation, such as alterations in genes associated with skin barrier function and collagen formation, our results also highlight the remarkable ability for organisms to re-adapt back to Earth via post-flight re-tuning of gene expression. Our findings can guide future research on developing countermeasures for mitigating spaceflight-associated skin damage.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166967/
PMC11167060,"Cosmic kidney disease: an integrated pan-omic, physiological and morphological study into spaceflight-induced renal dysfunction",Keith Siew; Kevin A. Nestler; Charlotte Nelson; Viola D’Ambrosio; Chutong Zhong; Zhongwang Li; Alessandra Grillo; Elizabeth R. Wan; Vaksha Patel; Eliah Overbey; JangKeun Kim; Sanghee Yun; Michael B. Vaughan; Chris Cheshire; Laura Cubitt; Jessica Broni-Tabi; Maneera Yousef Al-Jaber; Valery Boyko; Cem Meydan; Peter Barker; Shehbeel Arif; Fatemeh Afsari; Noah Allen; Mohammed Al-Maadheed; Selin Altinok; Nourdine Bah; Samuel Border; Amanda L. Brown; Keith Burling; Margareth Cheng-Campbell; Lorianna M. Colón; Lovorka Degoricija; Nichola Figg; Rebecca Finch; Jonathan Foox; Pouya Faridi; Alison French; Samrawit Gebre; Peter Gordon; Nadia Houerbi; Hossein Valipour Kahrood; Frederico C. Kiffer; Aleksandra S. Klosinska; Angela Kubik; Han-Chung Lee; Yinghui Li; Nicholas Lucarelli; Anthony L. Marullo; Irina Matei; Colleen M. McCann; Sayat Mimar; Ahmed Naglah; Jérôme Nicod; Kevin M. O’Shaughnessy; Lorraine Christine De Oliveira; Leah Oswalt; Laura Ioana Patras; San-huei Lai Polo; María Rodríguez-Lopez; Candice Roufosse; Omid Sadeghi-Alavijeh; Rebekah Sanchez-Hodge; Anindya S. Paul; Ralf Bernd Schittenhelm; Annalise Schweickart; Ryan T. Scott; Terry Chin Choy Lim Kam Sian; Willian A. da Silveira; Hubert Slawinski; Daniel Snell; Julio Sosa; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; Marshall Tabetah; Erwin Tanuwidjaya; Simon Walker-Samuel; Xiaoping Yang; Yasmin; Haijian Zhang; Jasminka Godovac-Zimmermann; Pinaki Sarder; Lauren M. Sanders; Sylvain V. Costes; Robert A. A. Campbell; Fathi Karouia; Vidya Mohamed-Alis; Samuel Rodriques; Steven Lynham; Joel Ricky Steele; Sergio Baranzini; Hossein Fazelinia; Zhongquan Dai; Akira Uruno; Dai Shiba; Masayuki Yamamoto; Eduardo A.C.Almeida; Elizabeth Blaber; Jonathan C. Schisler; Amelia J. Eisch; Masafumi Muratani; Sara R. Zwart; Scott M. Smith; Jonathan M. Galazka; Christopher E. Mason; Afshin Beheshti; Stephen B. Walsh,Nephrons; Renal calculi; Thrombotic microangiopathies; Sequencing; Mass spectrometry,71,"Missions into Deep Space are planned this decade. Yet the health consequences of exposure to microgravity and galactic cosmic radiation (GCR) over years-long missions on indispensable visceral organs such as the kidney are largely unexplored. We performed biomolecular (epigenomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, epiproteomic, metabolomic, metagenomic), clinical chemistry (electrolytes, endocrinology, biochemistry) and morphometry (histology, 3D imaging, miRNA-ISH, tissue weights) analyses using samples and datasets available from 11 spaceflight-exposed mouse and 5 human, 1 simulated microgravity rat and 4 simulated GCR-exposed mouse missions. We found that spaceflight induces: 1) renal transporter dephosphorylation which may indicate astronauts’ increased risk of nephrolithiasis is in part a primary renal phenomenon rather than solely a secondary consequence of bone loss; 2) remodelling of the nephron that results in expansion of distal convoluted tubule size but loss of overall tubule density; 3) renal damage and dysfunction when exposed to a Mars roundtrip dose-equivalent of simulated GCR.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11167060/
PMC11166981,Spaceflight induces changes in gene expression profiles linked to insulin and estrogen,Begum Aydogan Mathyk; Marshall Tabetah; Rashid Karim; Victoria Zaksas; JangKeun Kim; R. I. Anu; Masafumi Muratani; Alexia Tasoula; Ruth Subhash Singh; Yen-Kai Chen; Eliah Overbey; Jiwoon Park; Henry Cope; Hossein Fazelinia; Davide Povero; Joseph Borg; Remi V. Klotz; Min Yu; Steven L. Young; Christopher E. Mason; Nathaniel Szewczyk; Riley M. St Clair; Fathi Karouia; Afshin Beheshti,Systems biology; Computational biology and bioinformatics,95,"Organismal adaptations to spaceflight have been characterized at the molecular level in model organisms, including",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166981/
PMC11263583,Protective alleles and precision healthcare in crewed spaceflight,Lindsay A. Rutter; Matthew J. MacKay; Henry Cope; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; JangKeun Kim; Eliah Overbey; Braden T. Tierney; Masafumi Muratani; Ben Lamm; Daniela Bezdan; Amber M. Paul; Michael A. Schmidt; George M. Church; Stefania Giacomello; Christopher E. Mason,Rare variants; Personalized medicine,147,"Common and rare alleles are now being annotated across millions of human genomes, and omics technologies are increasingly being used to develop health and treatment recommendations. However, these alleles have not yet been systematically characterized relative to aerospace medicine. Here, we review published alleles naturally found in human cohorts that have a likely protective effect, which is linked to decreased cancer risk and improved bone, muscular, and cardiovascular health. Although some technical and ethical challenges remain, research into these protective mechanisms could translate into improved nutrition, exercise, and health recommendations for crew members during deep space missions.",2024,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11263583/
PMC11484870,Author Correction: To boldly go where no microRNAs have gone before: spaceflight impact on risk for small-for-gestational-age infants,Giada Corti; JangKeun Kim; Francisco J. Enguita; Joseph W. Guarnieri; Lawrence I. Grossman; Sylvain V. Costes; Matias Fuentealba; Ryan T. Scott; Andrea Magrini; Lauren M. Sanders; Kanhaiya Singh; Chandan K. Sen; Cassandra M. Juran; Amber M. Paul; David Furman; Jean Calleja-Agius; Christopher E. Mason; Diego Galeano; Massimo Bottini; Afshin Beheshti,Systems biology; Systems analysis; Reproductive disorders,0,N/A,2024,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11484870/
PMC10780891,Bread Wheat in Space Flight: Is There a Difference in Kernel Quality?,Tatiana S. Aniskina; Kirill A. Sudarikov; Margarita A. Levinskikh; Alexander A. Gulevich; Ekaterina N. Baranova,wheat kernel; starch granules; growing in space conditions; space station; hyperspectral imaging,40,"Planning long-term space flights necessarily includes issues of providing food for the crew. One of the areas of research is the development of technologies for independent production of food by the crew. Extensive research on lettuce has confirmed that the “space production” of lettuce is not inferior to that on Earth, even in the absence of gravity, but the same deep understanding of the quality of grain crops has not yet been achieved. Therefore, the goal of our work is to establish whether the conditions for growing wheat in outer space without gravity affect the weight and basic parameters of the grain, and whether this leads to increased asymmetry of the kernel and distortion of the starch composition. The objects of the study were wheat (",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10780891/
PMC7067979,Microbiological and Nutritional Analysis of Lettuce Crops Grown on the International Space Station,Christina L. M. Khodadad; Mary E. Hummerick; LaShelle E. Spencer; Anirudha R. Dixit; Jeffrey T. Richards; Matthew W. Romeyn; Trent M. Smith; Raymond M. Wheeler; Gioia D. Massa,lettuce; microgravity; ISS; phyllosphere; rhizosphere; space; microbes,87,"The ability to grow safe, fresh food to supplement packaged foods of astronauts in space has been an important goal for NASA. Food crops grown in space experience different environmental conditions than plants grown on Earth (e.g., reduced gravity, elevated radiation levels). To study the effects of space conditions, red romaine lettuce,",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7067979/
PMC4321547,Natural variation in the expression of ,Allison K. Strohm; Laura M. Vaughn; Patrick H. Masson,cadaverine; natural variation; polyamines; roots; transporter.,48,How the polyamine cadaverine alters plant development is poorly understood. Here it is shown that natural variation in,2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4321547/
PMC6710492,"Turbidity matters: differential effect of a 2,4-D formulation on the structure of microbial communities from clear and turbid freshwater systems",V.L. Lozano; C.E. Miranda; A.L. Vinocur; C. González; F. Unrein; M.J. Wolansky; H.N. Pizarro,"Ecology toxicology; 2,4-D; Organic turbidity; Microbial communities; Freshwater ecosystems; Microcosms",63,"We evaluated the effect of AsiMax 50®, a commercial formulation of 2,4-D (2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid), on the structure of both micro + nano phytoplankton (>2 μm; species composition and abundance) and cytometric populations (photosynthetic picoplankton (PPP, 0.2–2 μm), which included prokaryotic phycocyanin-rich picocyanobacteria (PC-Pcy), phycoerythrin-rich picocyanobacteria (PE-Pcy) and eukaryotic phototrophs (PEuk); and bacterioplankton (HB), heterotrophic bacteria), using a microcosms-based approach and a single 7-day exposure. Assays were performed on two different microbial assemblages sampled from freshwater bodies of two contrasting turbidity status: clear (chlorophyll",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6710492/
PMC12008199,Mechanosensing antagonizes ethylene signaling to promote root gravitropism in rice,Han-Qing Wang; Xing-Yu Zhao; Zhong Tang; Xin-Yuan Huang; Peng Wang; Wenhua Zhang; Yunhui Zhang; Sheng Luan; Fang-Jie Zhao,Plant signalling; Tropism; Plant hormones,71,"Root gravitropism relies on gravity perception by the root cap and requires tightly regulated phytohormone signaling. Here, we isolate a rice mutant that displays root coiling in hydroponics but normal gravitropic growth in soil. We identify",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12008199/
PMC8518694,Cadaverine regulates biotin synthesis to modulate primary root growth in Arabidopsis,Nicole M. Gibbs; Shih‐Heng Su; Samuel Lopez‐Nieves; Stéphane Mann; Claude Alban; Hiroshi A. Maeda; Patrick H. Masson,polyamines; cadaverine; biotin; root architecture,64,"Cadaverine, a polyamine, has been linked to modification of root growth architecture and response to environmental stresses in plants. However, the molecular mechanisms that govern the regulation of root growth by cadaverine are largely unexplored. Here we conducted a forward genetic screen and isolated a mutation,",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8518694/
PMC9861679,Low-Speed Clinorotation of ,Shih-Heng Su; Alexander Moen; Rien M. Groskopf; Katherine L. Baldwin; Brian Vesperman; Patrick H. Masson,clinostat; gravitropism; gravisensitivity; presentation time; perception time; realization time; clinostat effect,51,"Clinostats are instruments that continuously rotate biological specimens along an axis, thereby averaging their orientation relative to gravity over time. Our previous experiments indicated that low-speed clinorotation may itself trigger directional root tip curvature. In this project, we have investigated the root curvature response to low-speed clinorotation using",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9861679/
PMC2897429,New Device for High-Throughput Viability Screening of Flow Biofilms ,Michael R. Benoit; Carolyn G. Conant; Cristian Ionescu-Zanetti; Michael Schwartz; A. Matin,N/A,0,"Control of biofilms requires rapid methods to identify compounds effective against them and to isolate resistance-compromised mutants for identifying genes involved in enhanced biofilm resistance. While rapid screening methods for microtiter plate well (“static”) biofilms are available, there are no methods for such screening of continuous flow biofilms (“flow biofilms”). Since the latter biofilms more closely approximate natural biofilms, development of a high-throughput (HTP) method for screening them is desirable. We describe here a new method using a device comprised of microfluidic channels and a distributed pneumatic pump (BioFlux) that provides fluid flow to 96 individual biofilms. This device allows fine control of continuous or intermittent fluid flow over a broad range of flow rates, and the use of a standard well plate format provides compatibility with plate readers. We show that use of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing bacteria, staining with propidium iodide, and measurement of fluorescence with a plate reader permit rapid and accurate determination of biofilm viability. The biofilm viability measured with the plate reader agreed with that determined using plate counts, as well as with the results of fluorescence microscope image analysis. Using BioFlux and the plate reader, we were able to rapidly screen the effects of several antimicrobials on the viability of",2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2897429/
PMC4187989,Sigma S-Dependent Antioxidant Defense Protects Stationary-Phase ,Jing-Hung Wang; Rachna Singh; Michael Benoit; Mimi Keyhan; Matthew Sylvester; Michael Hsieh; Anuradha Thathireddy; Yi-Ju Hsieh; A. C. Matin,N/A,0,Stationary-phase bacteria are important in disease. The σ,2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4187989/
PMC8217198,Plasma membrane disruption (PMD) formation and repair in mechanosensitive tissues,Mackenzie L. Hagan; Vanshika Balayan; Meghan E. McGee-Lawrence,mechanotransduction; mechanosensation; cell membrane; mechanical loading; myocyte; muscle; osteocyte; bone; skeleton,0,"Mammalian cells employ an array of biological mechanisms to detect and respond to mechanical loading in their environment. One such mechanism is the formation of plasma membrane disruptions (PMD), which foster a molecular flux across cell membranes that promotes tissue adaptation. Repair of PMD through an orchestrated activity of molecular machinery is critical for cell survival, and the rate of PMD repair can affect downstream cellular signaling. PMD have been observed to influence the mechanical behavior of skin, alveolar, and gut epithelial cells, aortic endothelial cells, corneal keratocytes and epithelial cells, cardiac and skeletal muscle myocytes, neurons, and most recently, bone cells including osteoblasts, periodontal ligament cells, and osteocytes. PMD are therefore positioned to affect the physiological behavior of a wide range of vertebrate organ systems including skeletal and cardiac muscle, skin, eyes, the gastrointestinal tract, the vasculature, the respiratory system, and the skeleton. The purpose of this review is to describe the processes of PMD formation and repair across these mechanosensitive tissues, with a particular emphasis on comparing and contrasting repair mechanisms and downstream signaling to better understand the role of PMD in skeletal mechanobiology. The implications of PMD-related mechanisms for disease and potential therapeutic applications are also explored.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8217198/
PMC6981245,Effects of Spaceflight on the Mouse Submandibular Gland,Arthur R. Hand; Didem Dagdeviren; Natasha A. Larson; Christopher Haxhi; Maija I. Mednieks,salivary glands; microgravity; electron microscopy; immunohistochemistry,0,"This study was conducted to determine if the morphology and biochemistry of the mouse submandibular gland is affected by microgravity and the spaceflight environment. Tissues from female mice flown on the US space shuttle missions Space Transportation System (STS)-131 and STS-135 for 15 and 13 d, respectively, and from male mice flown on the 30 d Russian Bion-M1 biosatellite, were examined using transmission electron microscopy and light and electron microscopic immunohistochemistry. In contrast to the parotid gland, morphologic changes were not apparent in the submandibular gland. No significant changes in protein expression, as assessed by quantitative immunogold labeling, occurred in female mice flown for 13-15 d. In male mice, however, increased labeling for salivary androgen binding protein alpha (in acinar cell secretory granules), and epidermal growth factor and nerve growth factor (in granular convoluted duct cell granules) was seen after 30 d in space. These results indicate that spaceflight alters secretory protein expression in the submandibular gland and suggest that the sex of the animals and the length of the flight may affect the response. These findings also show that individual salivary glands respond differently to spaceflight. Saliva contains proteins secreted from salivary glands and is easily collected, therefore is a useful biofluid for general medical analyses and in particular for monitoring the physiology and health of astronauts.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6981245/
PMC6981245,Effects of Spaceflight on the Mouse Submandibular Gland,Arthur R. Hand; Didem Dagdeviren; Natasha A. Larson; Christopher Haxhi; Maija I. Mednieks,salivary glands; microgravity; electron microscopy; immunohistochemistry,0,"This study was conducted to determine if the morphology and biochemistry of the mouse submandibular gland is affected by microgravity and the spaceflight environment. Tissues from female mice flown on the US space shuttle missions Space Transportation System (STS)-131 and STS-135 for 15 and 13 d, respectively, and from male mice flown on the 30 d Russian Bion-M1 biosatellite, were examined using transmission electron microscopy and light and electron microscopic immunohistochemistry. In contrast to the parotid gland, morphologic changes were not apparent in the submandibular gland. No significant changes in protein expression, as assessed by quantitative immunogold labeling, occurred in female mice flown for 13-15 d. In male mice, however, increased labeling for salivary androgen binding protein alpha (in acinar cell secretory granules), and epidermal growth factor and nerve growth factor (in granular convoluted duct cell granules) was seen after 30 d in space. These results indicate that spaceflight alters secretory protein expression in the submandibular gland and suggest that the sex of the animals and the length of the flight may affect the response. These findings also show that individual salivary glands respond differently to spaceflight. Saliva contains proteins secreted from salivary glands and is easily collected, therefore is a useful biofluid for general medical analyses and in particular for monitoring the physiology and health of astronauts.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6981245/
PMC6131065,Response of the mouse sublingual gland to spaceflight,Didem Dagdeviren; John Beallias; Izaz Khan; Maija I. Mednieks; Arthur R. Hand,microgravity; salivary gland structure; protein expression; electron microscopy; immunohistochemistry,0,"The ultrastructure and immunohistochemistry of secretory proteins of sublingual glands were studied in mice flown on the US space shuttles Discovery (Space Transportation System [STS]-131) and Atlantis (STS-135). No differences in mucous acinar or serous demilune cell structure were observed between sublingual glands of ground control and flight mice. In contrast, previous studies showed autophagy and apoptosis of parotid serous acinar cells in flight mice. The expression of parotid secretory protein (PSP) in sublingual demilune cells of STS-131 flight mice was significantly increased compared to ground control mice but decreased in STS-135 flight mice. Similarly, mucin (Muc19) expression in acinar cells and PKA-RII expression in demilune cells were increased in STS-131 flight mice and decreased in STS-135 flight mice, but not significantly. Demilune cell and parotid protein (DCPP) was slightly decreased in mice from both flights, and nuclear PKA-RII was slightly increased. These results indicate that the response of salivary glands to spaceflight conditions varies among the different glands, cell types and secretory proteins. Additionally, the spaceflight environment, including the effects of microgravity, modifies protein expression. Determining changes in salivary proteins may lead to development of non-invasive methods to assess the physiological status of astronauts.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6131065/
PMC11233762,Upregulation of ,Takehito Ouchi; Kyosuke Kono; Ryouichi Satou; Ryuya Kurashima; Koji Yamaguchi; Maki Kimura; Yoshiyuki Shibukawa,lunar gravity; salivary gland; small G protein; amy1; microarray,25,,2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11233762/
PMC6213004,"Reactivation of Latent Epstein-Barr Virus: A Comparison after Exposure to Gamma, Proton, Carbon, and Iron Radiation",Satish K. Mehta; David C. Bloom; Ianik Plante; Raymond Stowe; Alan H. Feiveson; Ashlie Renner; Adit Dhummakupt; Dhruv Markan; Ye Zhang; Honglu Wu; Blaire Scoles; Jeffrey I. Cohen; Brian Crucian; Duane L. Pierson,space radiation; Epstein‒Barr virus; virus reactivation,23,"Among the many stressors astronauts are exposed to during spaceflight, cosmic radiation may lead to various serious health effects. Specifically, space radiation may contribute to decreased immunity, which has been documented in astronauts during short- and long-duration missions, as evidenced by several changes in cellular immunity and plasma cytokine levels. Reactivation of latent herpes viruses, either directly from radiation of latently infected cells and/or from perturbation of the immune system, may result in disease in astronauts. Epstein‒Barr virus (EBV) is one of the eight human herpes viruses known to infect more than 90% of human adults and persists for the life of the host without normally causing adverse effects. Reactivation of several latent viruses in astronauts is well documented, although the mechanism of reactivation is not well understood. We studied the effect of four different types of radiation, (1)",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6213004/
PMC7171750,The influence of spaceflight on the astronaut salivary microbiome and the search for a microbiome biomarker for viral reactivation,Camilla Urbaniak; Hernan Lorenzi; James Thissen; Crystal Jaing; Brian Crucian; Clarence Sams; Duane Pierson; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Satish Mehta,Salivary microbiome; Viral reactivation; Astronaut microbiome; Spaceflight; International space station,59,"Spaceflight impacts astronauts in many ways but little is known on how spaceflight affects the salivary microbiome and the consequences of these changes on astronaut health, such as viral reactivation. In order to understand this, the salivary microbiome was analyzed with 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing, and saliva viral titers were analyzed with quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) with primers specific for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), and varicella zoster virus (VZV) from 10 astronauts pre-flight, in-flight, and post-flight. This is the first study to look at how the salivary microbiome changes as a result of spaceflight and the search for bacterial biomarkers for viral reactivation. Further studies examining the role of specific organisms that were shown to be correlative and predictive in viral reactivation, a serious problem in astronauts during spaceflight, could lead to mitigation strategies to help prevent disease during both short and long duration space missions. Video abstract.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7171750/
PMC10414970,The AUX1-AFB1-CNGC14 module establishes a longitudinal root surface pH profile,Nelson BC Serre; Daša Wernerová; Pruthvi Vittal; Shiv Mani Dubey; Eva Medvecká; Adriana Jelínková; Jan Petrášek; Guido Grossmann; Matyáš Fendrych; Yoselin Benitez-Alfonso,auxin; root; pH,80,Plant roots navigate in the soil environment following the gravity vector. Cell divisions in the meristem and rapid cell growth in the elongation zone propel the root tips through the soil. Actively elongating cells acidify their apoplast to enable cell wall extension by the activity of plasma membrane AHA H,2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10414970/
PMC8450295,Telomere length assessments of muscle stem cells in rodent and human skeletal muscle sections,Elisia D. Tichy; Foteini Mourkioti,Cell Biology; Cell isolation; Cell-based Assays; In Situ Hybridization; Microscopy; Stem Cells,8,"Measurements of telomere length in skeletal muscle stem cells (MuSCs), a rare cell population within muscles, provide insights into cellular dysfunction in diseased conditions. Here, we describe a protocol ( For complete details on the use and execution of this protocol, please refer to",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8450295/
PMC8183356,Persistent NF-κB activation in muscle stem cells induces proliferation-independent telomere shortening,Elisia D. Tichy; Nuoying Ma; David Sidibe; Emanuele Loro; Jacob Kocan; Delia Z. Chen; Tejvir S. Khurana; Paul Hasty; Foteini Mourkioti,N/A,56,"During the repeated cycles of damage and repair in many muscle disorders, including Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), the muscle stem cell (MuSC) pool becomes less efficient at responding to and repairing damage. The underlying mechanism of such stem cell dysfunction is not fully known. Here, we demonstrate that the distinct early telomere shortening of diseased MuSCs in both mice and young DMD patients is associated with aberrant NF-κB activation. We find that prolonged NF-κB activation in MuSCs in chronic injuries leads to shortened telomeres and Ku80 dysregulation and results in severe skeletal muscle defects. Our studies provide evidence of a role for NF-κB in regulating stem-cell-specific telomere length, independently of cell replication, and could be a congruent mechanism that is applicable to additional tissues and/or diseases characterized by systemic chronic inflammation.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8183356/
PMC8932657,Piezo1 regulates the regenerative capacity of skeletal muscles via orchestration of stem cell morphological states,Nuoying Ma; Delia Chen; Ji-Hyung Lee; Paola Kuri; Edward Blake Hernandez; Jacob Kocan; Hamd Mahmood; Elisia D. Tichy; Panteleimon Rompolas; Foteini Mourkioti,N/A,66,"Muscle stem cells (MuSCs) are essential for tissue homeostasis and regeneration, but the potential contribution of MuSC morphology to in vivo function remains unknown. Here, we demonstrate that quiescent MuSCs are morphologically heterogeneous and exhibit different patterns of cellular protrusions. We classified quiescent MuSCs into three functionally distinct stem cell states: responsive, intermediate, and sensory. We demonstrate that the shift between different stem cell states promotes regeneration and is regulated by the sensing protein Piezo1. Pharmacological activation of Piezo1 is sufficient to prime MuSCs toward more responsive cells. Piezo1 deletion in MuSCs shifts the distribution toward less responsive cells, mimicking the disease phenotype we find in dystrophic muscles. We further demonstrate that Piezo1 reactivation ameliorates the MuSC morphological and regenerative defects of dystrophic muscles. These findings advance our fundamental understanding of how stem cells respond to injury and identify Piezo1 as a key regulator for adjusting stem cell states essential for regeneration.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8932657/
PMC10504369,"Impacts of radiation exposure, hindlimb unloading, and recovery on murine skeletal muscle cell telomere length",Elisia D. Tichy; Ji-Hyung Lee; Grant Li; Katrina N. Estep; F. Brad Johnson; Foteini Mourkioti,Stem cells; Cell biology,83,"Astronauts are exposed to harsh conditions, including cosmic radiation and microgravity. Spaceflight elongates human telomeres in peripheral blood, which shorten upon return to Earth and approach baseline levels during postflight recovery. Astronauts also encounter muscle atrophy, losing up to 20% loss of muscle mass on spaceflights. Telomere length changes in muscle cells of astronauts remain unexplored. This study investigates telomere alterations in grounded mice experiencing radiation exposure and muscle atrophy, via a hindlimb unloading spaceflight mimicking model. We find telomere lengthening is present in muscle stem cells and in myofiber nuclei, but not in muscle-resident endothelial cells. We further assessed telomere length in the model following hindlimb unloading recovery. We find that telomere length failed to return to baseline values. Our results suggest a role for telomeres in muscle acclimatization, which is relevant for the well-being of astronauts in space, and upon their return to Earth.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10504369/
PMC3982735,"Ethylene-Induced Flavonol Accumulation in Guard Cells Suppresses Reactive
Oxygen Species and Moderates Stomatal Aperture",Justin M. Watkins; Paul J. Hechler; Gloria K. Muday,N/A,0,N/A,2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3982735/
PMC4682325,Transcriptional and Hormonal Regulation of Gravitropism of Woody Stems in ,Suzanne Gerttula; Matthew Zinkgraf; Gloria K. Muday; Daniel R. Lewis; Farid M. Ibatullin; Harry Brumer; Foster Hart; Shawn D. Mansfield; Vladimir Filkov; Andrew Groover,N/A,0,Fundamental mechanisms associated with gravitropism in woody stems of,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4682325/
PMC10264680,The EXO70 inhibitor Endosidin2 alters plasma membrane protein composition in Arabidopsis roots,Xiaohui Li; Peipei Zhu; Yen-Ju Chen; Lei Huang; Diwen Wang; David T. Newton; Chuan-Chih Hsu; Guang Lin; W. Andy Tao; Christopher J. Staiger; Chunhua Zhang,plasma membrane protein enrichment; exocytosis; proteomics; small molecule inhibitors; exocyst,95,"To sustain normal growth and allow rapid responses to environmental cues, plants alter the plasma membrane protein composition under different conditions presumably by regulation of delivery, stability, and internalization. Exocytosis is a conserved cellular process that delivers proteins and lipids to the plasma membrane or extracellular space in eukaryotes. The octameric exocyst complex contributes to exocytosis by tethering secretory vesicles to the correct site for membrane fusion; however, whether the exocyst complex acts universally for all secretory vesicle cargo or just for specialized subsets used during polarized growth and trafficking is currently unknown. In addition to its role in exocytosis, the exocyst complex is also known to participate in membrane recycling and autophagy. Using a previously identified small molecule inhibitor of the plant exocyst complex subunit EXO70A1, Endosidin2 (ES2), combined with a plasma membrane enrichment method and quantitative proteomic analysis, we examined the composition of plasma membrane proteins in the root of Arabidopsis seedlings, after inhibition of the ES2-targetted exocyst complex, and verified our findings by live imaging of GFP-tagged plasma membrane proteins in root epidermal cells. The abundance of 145 plasma membrane proteins was significantly reduced following short-term ES2 treatments and these likely represent candidate cargo proteins of exocyst-mediated trafficking. Gene Ontology analysis showed that these proteins play diverse functions in cell growth, cell wall biosynthesis, hormone signaling, stress response, membrane transport, and nutrient uptake. Additionally, we quantified the effect of ES2 on the spatial distribution of EXO70A1 with live-cell imaging. Our results indicate that the plant exocyst complex mediates constitutive dynamic transport of subsets of plasma membrane proteins during normal root growth.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10264680/
PMC7358545,A Conditional Mutation in ,Carole L. Gibson; Jonathan W. Isley; Tanya G. Falbel; Cassie T. Mattox; Daniel R. Lewis; Kasee E. Metcalf; Gloria K. Muday,SCD1; gravitropism; lateral root; auxin transport; PIN2,73,"Auxin is transported in plants with distinct polarity, defined by transport proteins of the PIN-formed (PIN) family. Components of the complex trafficking machinery responsible for polar PIN protein localization have been identified by genetic approaches, but severe developmental phenotypes of trafficking mutants complicate dissection of this pathway. We utilized a temperature sensitive allele of",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7358545/
PMC9108708,"A comprehensive SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 review, Part 1: Intracellular overdrive for SARS-CoV-2 infection",David A. Jamison; S. Anand Narayanan; Nídia S. Trovão; Joseph W. Guarnieri; Michael J. Topper; Pedro M. Moraes-Vieira; Viktorija Zaksas; Keshav K. Singh; Eve Syrkin Wurtele; Afshin Beheshti,Viral infection; Infection,75,"COVID-19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2, has claimed approximately 5 million lives and 257 million cases reported globally. This virus and disease have significantly affected people worldwide, whether directly and/or indirectly, with a virulent pathogen that continues to evolve as we race to learn how to prevent, control, or cure COVID-19. The focus of this review is on the SARS-CoV-2 virus’ mechanism of infection and its proclivity at adapting and restructuring the intracellular environment to support viral replication. We highlight current knowledge and how scientific communities with expertize in viral, cellular, and clinical biology have contributed to increase our understanding of SARS-CoV-2, and how these findings may help explain the widely varied clinical observations of COVID-19 patients.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9108708/
PMC7555797,Changes in Nuclear Shape and Gene Expression in Response to Simulated Microgravity Are LINC Complex-Dependent,Srujana Neelam; Brian Richardson; Richard Barker; Ceasar Udave; Simon Gilroy; Mark J. Cameron; Howard G. Levine; Ye Zhang,LINC complex; simulated microgravity; nuclear morphology,66,"Microgravity is known to affect the organization of the cytoskeleton, cell and nuclear morphology and to elicit differential expression of genes associated with the cytoskeleton, focal adhesions and the extracellular matrix. Although the nucleus is mechanically connected to the cytoskeleton through the Linker of Nucleoskeleton and Cytoskeleton (LINC) complex, the role of this group of proteins in these responses to microgravity has yet to be defined. In our study, we used a simulated microgravity device, a 3-D clinostat (Gravite), to investigate whether the LINC complex mediates cellular responses to the simulated microgravity environment. We show that nuclear shape and differential gene expression are both responsive to simulated microgravity in a LINC-dependent manner and that this response changes with the duration of exposure to simulated microgravity. These LINC-dependent genes likely represent elements normally regulated by the mechanical forces imposed by gravity on Earth.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7555797/
PMC3545801,Growth of ,Wayne L. Nicholson; Kirill Krivushin; David Gilichinsky; Andrew C. Schuerger,astrobiology; planetary protection,0,"The ability of terrestrial microorganisms to grow in the near-surface environment of Mars is of importance to the search for life and protection of that planet from forward contamination by human and robotic exploration. Because most water on present-day Mars is frozen in the regolith, permafrosts are considered to be terrestrial analogs of the martian subsurface environment. Six bacterial isolates were obtained from a permafrost borehole in northeastern Siberia capable of growth under conditions of low temperature (0 °C), low pressure (7 mbar), and a CO",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3545801/
PMC3869332,Complete Genome Sequence of ,Michael T. Leonard; Nedka Panayotova; William G. Farmerie; Eric W. Triplett; Wayne L. Nicholson,N/A,6,We report the complete genome sequence of,2013,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3869332/
PMC4135744,Exposure of ,Samantha M. Waters; José A. Robles-Martínez; Wayne L. Nicholson,N/A,0,"Studies of how microorganisms respond to pressure have been limited mostly to the extreme high pressures of the deep sea (i.e., the piezosphere). In contrast, despite the fact that the growth of most bacteria is inhibited at pressures below ∼2.5 kPa, little is known of microbial responses to low pressure (LP). To study the global LP response, we performed transcription microarrays on",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4135744/
PMC3911009,Resistance of ,Ralf Moeller; Marina Raguse; Günther Reitz; Ryuichi Okayasu; Zuofeng Li; Stuart Klein; Peter Setlow; Wayne L. Nicholson,N/A,0,"The roles of various core components, including α/β/γ-type small acid-soluble spore proteins (SASP), dipicolinic acid (DPA), core water content, and DNA repair by apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) endonucleases or nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), in",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3911009/
PMC4923109,Cultivation of ,Patricia Fajardo-Cavazos; Wayne L. Nicholson,antibiotic resistance; mutation; rifampicin; space flight,52,Bacteria of the genus,2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4923109/
PMC11673879,Thermal Plasticity and Evolutionary Constraints in ,Enrique Hurtado-Bautista; Africa Islas-Robles; Gabriel Moreno-Hagelsieb; Gabriela Olmedo-Alvarez,experimental evolution; critical high temperature; phenotypic plasticity; norms of reaction to temperature; convergent evolution; c-di-AMP; upper thermal limit; evolutionary rescue; thermal plasticity; thermal niche,65,"As global temperatures rise due to climate change, understanding how bacteria respond to heat is essential. Bacteria are critical to ecosystems, helping recycle nutrients, break down organic matter, and support plant growth. If they struggle to adapt to warmer conditions, the effects could ripple through ecosystems. Our study tested whether",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11673879/
PMC5648920,Cultivation in Space Flight Produces Minimal Alterations in the Susceptibility of ,Michael D. Morrison; Patricia Fajardo-Cavazos; Wayne L. Nicholson,antibiotic profiling; International Space Station; phenotype; space flight,0,"Past results have suggested that bacterial antibiotic susceptibility is altered during space flight. To test this notion,",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5648920/
PMC5817088,Alterations in the Spectrum of Spontaneous Rifampicin-Resistance Mutations in the ,Patricia Fajardo-Cavazos; Joshua D. Leehan; Wayne L. Nicholson,antibiotic resistance; mutation; rifampicin; spaceflight,50,The effect of,2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5817088/
PMC7825584,Mechanotransduction in Prokaryotes: A Possible Mechanism of Spaceflight Adaptation,Patricia Fajardo-Cavazos; Wayne L. Nicholson,bacteria; gravity; mechanosensing; mechanotransduction,79,"Our understanding of the mechanisms of microgravity perception and response in prokaryotes (Bacteria and Archaea) lag behind those which have been elucidated in eukaryotic organisms. In this hypothesis paper, we: (i) review how eukaryotic cells sense and respond to microgravity using various pathways responsive to unloading of mechanical stress; (ii) we observe that prokaryotic cells possess many structures analogous to mechanosensitive structures in eukaryotes; (iii) we review current evidence indicating that prokaryotes also possess active mechanosensing and mechanotransduction mechanisms; and (iv) we propose a complete mechanotransduction model including mechanisms by which mechanical signals may be transduced to the gene expression apparatus through alterations in bacterial nucleoid architecture, DNA supercoiling, and epigenetic pathways.",2021,other,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7825584/
PMC8904044,Environmental Dependence of Competitive Fitness in Rifampin-Resistant ,Joss D. Leehan; Wayne L. Nicholson,evolution; RNA polymerase; fitness; rifampin; rifampin resistance; transcription,0,RNA polymerase (RNAP) is a highly conserved macromolecular machine that contributes to the flow of genetic information from genotype to phenotype. In,2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8904044/
PMC3012082,Analysis of Interactions of ,Andrea L. Radtke; James W. Wilson; Shameema Sarker; Cheryl A. Nickerson,N/A,85,The prevailing paradigm of,2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3012082/
PMC11088941,3D Oral and Cervical Tissue Models to Study Papillomavirus Host-Pathogen Interactions,Robert Jackson; Jason Maarsingh; Melissa M. Herbst-Kralovetz; Koenraad Van Doorslaer,HPV; organotypic rafts; rotating wall vessel; bioreactor; 3D culture; cervix; oral; host-microbe interactions,0,"Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection occurs in differentiating epithelial tissues, and cancers caused by the high-risk types (e.g., HPV16 and HPV18) typically occur at oropharyngeal and anogenital anatomical sites. The HPV life cycle is differentiation-dependent, requiring tissue culture methodology able to recapitulate the three-dimensional (3D) stratified epithelium. Here we report two distinct and complementary methods to grow differentiating epithelial tissues that mimic many critical morphological and biochemical aspects of We describe methods that will allow readers to start successfully culturing 3D tissues from oral and cervical cells. These tissues have been used for microscopic visualization, scanning-electron microscopy, and large -omics studies to gain insights into epithelial biology, the HPV life cycle, and host-pathogen interactions. Support Protocol 1: Isolation of epithelial cells from patient-derived tissues Support Protocol 2: Growth and maintenance of primary human epithelial cells in monolayer culture Support Protocol 3: PCR-based HPV screening of primary cell cultures Basic Protocol 1: Establishing human primary cell-derived 3D organotypic raft cultures Support Protocol 4: Growth and maintenance of human A2EN cells as monolayer culture Support Protocol 5: Preparing the slow turning lateral vessel bioreactor Support Protocol 6: Preparing the cytodex-3 microcarrier beads Basic Protocol 2: Establishing human 3D cervical tissues using the rotating wall vessel bioreactor Basic Protocol 3: Histological assessment of 3D organotypic raft tissues Basic Protocol 4: Spatial analysis of protein expression in 3D organotypic raft cultures Basic Protocol 5: Immunofluorescent microscopy imaging of rotating wall vessel derived 3D tissues Basic Protocol 6: Ultrastructural visualization and imaging of rotating wall vessel derived 3D tissues Support Protocol 7: RNA extraction from 3D tissues Basic Protocol 7: Characterization of gene expression by RT-qPCR",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11088941/
PMC3187170,Induction of Attachment-Independent Biofilm Formation and Repression of ,Sarah L. Castro; Mayra Nelman-Gonzalez; Cheryl A. Nickerson; C. Mark Ott,N/A,0,The opportunistic pathogen,2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3187170/
PMC3133089,Characterization of the ,Matthew E. Jennings; Laura N. Quick; Anjali Soni; Richard R. Davis; Kathleen Crosby; C. Mark Ott; Cheryl A. Nickerson; James W. Wilson,N/A,0,N/A,2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3133089/
PMC3242767,Evaluation of Microorganisms Cultured from Injured and Repressed Tissue Regeneration Sites in Endangered Giant Aquatic Ozark Hellbender Salamanders,Cheryl A. Nickerson; C. Mark Ott; Sarah L. Castro; Veronica M. Garcia; Thomas C. Molina; Jeffrey T. Briggler; Amber L. Pitt; Joseph J. Tavano; J. Kelly Byram; Jennifer Barrila; Max A. Nickerson,N/A,90,"Investigation into the causes underlying the rapid, global amphibian decline provides critical insight into the effects of changing ecosystems. Hypothesized and confirmed links between amphibian declines, disease, and environmental changes are increasingly represented in published literature. However, there are few long-term amphibian studies that include data on population size, abnormality/injury rates, disease, and habitat variables to adequately assess changes through time. We cultured and identified microorganisms isolated from abnormal/injured and repressed tissue regeneration sites of the endangered Ozark Hellbender,",2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3242767/
PMC3067220,Transcriptional and Proteomic Responses of ,Aurélie Crabbé; Michael J. Schurr; Pieter Monsieurs; Lisa Morici; Jill Schurr; James W. Wilson; C. Mark Ott; George Tsaprailis; Duane L. Pierson; Heidi Stefanyshyn-Piper; Cheryl A. Nickerson,N/A,0,"Assessing bacterial behavior in microgravity is important for risk assessment and prevention of infectious diseases during spaceflight missions. Furthermore, this research field allows the unveiling of novel connections between low-fluid-shear regions encountered by pathogens during their natural infection process and bacterial virulence. This study is the first to characterize the spaceflight-induced global transcriptional and proteomic responses of",2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3067220/
PMC3251573,New Insights into the Bacterial Fitness-Associated Mechanisms Revealed by the Characterization of Large Plasmids of an Avian Pathogenic ,Melha Mellata; Jacob T. Maddux; Timothy Nam; Nicholas Thomson; Heidi Hauser; Mark P. Stevens; Suman Mukhopadhyay; Shameema Sarker; Aurélie Crabbé; Cheryl A. Nickerson; Javier Santander; Roy Curtiss,N/A,90,Extra-intestinal pathogenic,2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3251573/
PMC3647661,Lack of Norovirus Replication and Histo-Blood Group Antigen Expression in 3-Dimensional Intestinal Epithelial Cells,Melissa M. Herbst-Kralovetz; Andrea L. Radtke; Margarita K. Lay; Brooke E. Hjelm; Alice N. Bolick; Shameema S. Sarker; Robert L. Atmar; David H. Kingsley; Charles J. Arntzen; Mary K. Estes; Cheryl A. Nickerson,norovirus replication; 3-D intestinal epithelial cell culture; INT-407; blood group H type antigens; Lewis blood-group system; human intestinal epithelial cells; rotating wall vessel bioreactor; Norwalk virus; viruses,41,TOC summary: The 3-dimensional intestinal model is not sufficient as a virus replication system for developing vaccines or drugs to control human norovirus infections.,2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3647661/
PMC4085587,Conservation of the Low-shear Modeled Microgravity Response in Enterobacteriaceae and Analysis of the ,Anjali Soni; Laura O’Sullivan; Laura N Quick; C. Mark Ott; Cheryl A Nickerson; James W Wilson,Enterobacteriaceae; environmental response; low shear modeled microgravity; rotating wall vessel; Salmonella Typhimurium.,36,"Low fluid shear force, including that encountered in microgravity models, induces bacterial responses, but the range of bacteria capable of responding to this signal remains poorly characterized. We systematically analyzed a range of Gram negative Enterobacteriaceae for conservation of the low-shear modeled microgravity (LSMMG) response using phenotypic assays, qPCR, and targeted mutations. Our results indicate LSMMG response conservation across Enterobacteriacae with potential variance in up- or down-regulation of a given response depending on genus. Based on the data, we analyzed the role of the",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4085587/
PMC4096993,Mimicking the host and its microenvironment ,Aurélie Crabbé; Maria A. Ledesma; Cheryl A. Nickerson,N/A,0,Why is a healthy person protected from,2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4096993/
PMC7467030,Hypotheses about sub-optimal hydration in the weeks ,Jodi D. Stookey; Prasanna K.R. Allu; Dorothee Chabas; David Pearce; Florian Lang,Chronic hydration; Hypertonicity; COVID-19; Mortality; ACE2 receptors; VEGF; AQP5; SGK1; Saliva osmolality; Drinking water intervention,148,"To address urgent need for strategies to limit mortality from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), this review describes experimental, clinical and epidemiological evidence that suggests that chronic sub-optimal hydration in the weeks",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7467030/
PMC4427280,Recellularization of Decellularized Lung Scaffolds Is Enhanced by Dynamic Suspension Culture,Aurélie Crabbé; Yulong Liu; Shameema F. Sarker; Nicholas R. Bonenfant; Jennifer Barrila; Zachary D. Borg; James J. Lee; Daniel J. Weiss; Cheryl A. Nickerson,N/A,63,"Strategies are needed to improve repopulation of decellularized lung scaffolds with stromal and functional epithelial cells. We demonstrate that decellularized mouse lungs recellularized in a dynamic low fluid shear suspension bioreactor, termed the rotating wall vessel (RWV), contained more cells with decreased apoptosis, increased proliferation and enhanced levels of total RNA compared to static recellularization conditions. These results were observed with two relevant mouse cell types: bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal (stem) cells (MSCs) and alveolar type II cells (C10). In addition, MSCs cultured in decellularized lungs under static but not bioreactor conditions formed multilayered aggregates. Gene expression and immunohistochemical analyses suggested differentiation of MSCs into collagen I-producing fibroblast-like cells in the bioreactor, indicating enhanced potential for remodeling of the decellularized scaffold matrix. In conclusion, dynamic suspension culture is promising for enhancing repopulation of decellularized lungs, and could contribute to remodeling the extracellular matrix of the scaffolds with subsequent effects on differentiation and functionality of inoculated cells.",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4427280/
PMC5460263,Three-dimensional organotypic co-culture model of intestinal epithelial cells and macrophages to study ,Jennifer Barrila; Jiseon Yang; Aurélie Crabbé; Shameema F. Sarker; Yulong Liu; C. Mark Ott; Mayra A. Nelman-Gonzalez; Simon J. Clemett; Seth D. Nydam; Rebecca J. Forsyth; Richard R. Davis; Brian E. Crucian; Heather Quiriarte; Kenneth L. Roland; Karen Brenneman; Clarence Sams; Christine Loscher; Cheryl A. Nickerson,N/A,84,Three-dimensional models of human intestinal epithelium mimic the differentiated form and function of parental tissues often not exhibited by two-dimensional monolayers and respond to,2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5460263/
PMC6204695,Modeling Host-Pathogen Interactions in the Context of the Microenvironment: Three-Dimensional Cell Culture Comes of Age,Jennifer Barrila; Aurélie Crabbé; Jiseon Yang; Karla Franco; Seth D. Nydam; Rebecca J. Forsyth; Richard R. Davis; Sandhya Gangaraju; C. Mark Ott; Carolyn B. Coyne; Mina J. Bissell; Cheryl A. Nickerson,3-D; 3D; RWV; rotating wall vessel; gut-on-a-chip; host-microbe interaction; host-pathogen interactions; mechanotransduction; organ-on-a-chip; organoid,0,"Tissues and organs provide the structural and biochemical landscapes upon which microbial pathogens and commensals function to regulate health and disease. While flat two-dimensional (2-D) monolayers composed of a single cell type have provided important insight into understanding host-pathogen interactions and infectious disease mechanisms, these reductionist models lack many essential features present in the native host microenvironment that are known to regulate infection, including three-dimensional (3-D) architecture, multicellular complexity, commensal microbiota, gas exchange and nutrient gradients, and physiologically relevant biomechanical forces (e.g., fluid shear, stretch, compression).",2018,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6204695/
PMC7943786,Evaluating the effect of spaceflight on the host–pathogen interaction between human intestinal epithelial cells and ,Jennifer Barrila; Shameema F. Sarker; Nicole Hansmeier; Shanshan Yang; Kristina Buss; Natalia Briones; Jin Park; Richard R. Davis; Rebecca J. Forsyth; C. Mark Ott; Kevin Sato; Cristine Kosnik; Anthony Yang; Cheryl Shimoda; Nicole Rayl; Diana Ly; Aaron Landenberger; Stephanie D. Wilson; Naoko Yamazaki; Jason Steel; Camila Montano; Rolf U. Halden; Tom Cannon; Sarah L. Castro-Wallace; Cheryl A. Nickerson,Microbiology,82,"Spaceflight uniquely alters the physiology of both human cells and microbial pathogens, stimulating cellular and molecular changes directly relevant to infectious disease. However, the influence of this environment on host–pathogen interactions remains poorly understood. Here we report our results from the STL-IMMUNE study flown aboard Space Shuttle mission STS-131, which investigated multi-omic responses (transcriptomic, proteomic) of human intestinal epithelial cells to infection with",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7943786/
PMC11888247,,Andrew W. Day; Jeyra Perez-Lozada; Alyssa DiLeo; Katrina Blandino; Jamie Maguire; Carol A. Kumamoto,N/A,62,N/A,2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11888247/
PMC3851762,Spaceflight Enhances Cell Aggregation and Random Budding in ,Aurélie Crabbé; Sheila M. Nielsen-Preiss; Christine M. Woolley; Jennifer Barrila; Kent Buchanan; James McCracken; Diane O. Inglis; Stephen C. Searles; Mayra A. Nelman-Gonzalez; C. Mark Ott; James W. Wilson; Duane L. Pierson; Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper; Linda E. Hyman; Cheryl A. Nickerson,N/A,108,"This study presents the first global transcriptional profiling and phenotypic characterization of the major human opportunistic fungal pathogen,",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3851762/
PMC8067245,"Growth and Antifungal Resistance of the Pathogenic Yeast, ",Sheila Nielsen; Kenna White; Kyle Preiss; Dakota Peart; Kathryn Gianoulias; Rachel Juel; James Sutton; James McKinney; Jaclyn Bender; Gabrielle Pinc; Kela Bergren; Wendy Gans; Jessica Kelley; Millard McQuaid,microgravity; spaceflight; yeast; amphotericin B; caspofungin; antifungal; ISS; Space X; FPA; GAP; FEP bag,54,This report was designed to compare spaceflight-induced cellular and physiological adaptations of,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8067245/
PMC8044432,NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus pipeline: standardized processing of short-read RNA-seq data,Eliah G. Overbey; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; Zhe Zhang; Komal S. Rathi; Homer Fogle; Willian A. da Silveira; Richard J. Barker; Joseph J. Bass; Afshin Beheshti; Daniel C. Berrios; Elizabeth A. Blaber; Egle Cekanaviciute; Helio A. Costa; Laurence B. Davin; Kathleen M. Fisch; Samrawit G. Gebre; Matthew Geniza; Rachel Gilbert; Simon Gilroy; Gary Hardiman; Raúl Herranz; Yared H. Kidane; Colin P.S. Kruse; Michael D. Lee; Ted Liefeld; Norman G. Lewis; J. Tyson McDonald; Robert Meller; Tejaswini Mishra; Imara Y. Perera; Shayoni Ray; Sigrid S. Reinsch; Sara Brin Rosenthal; Michael Strong; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Candice G.T. Tahimic; Deanne M. Taylor; Joshua P. Vandenbrink; Alicia Villacampa; Silvio Weging; Chris Wolverton; Sarah E. Wyatt; Luis Zea; Sylvain V. Costes; Jonathan M. Galazka,Omics; Space Sciences,50,"With the development of transcriptomic technologies, we are able to quantify precise changes in gene expression profiles from astronauts and other organisms exposed to spaceflight. Members of NASA GeneLab and GeneLab-associated analysis working groups (AWGs) have developed a consensus pipeline for analyzing short-read RNA-sequencing data from spaceflight-associated experiments. The pipeline includes quality control, read trimming, mapping, and gene quantification steps, culminating in the detection of differentially expressed genes. This data analysis pipeline and the results of its execution using data submitted to GeneLab are now all publicly available through the GeneLab database. We present here the full details and rationale for the construction of this pipeline in order to promote transparency, reproducibility, and reusability of pipeline data; to provide a template for data processing of future spaceflight-relevant datasets; and to encourage cross-analysis of data from other databases with the data available in GeneLab.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8044432/
PMC9701605,Challenges and considerations for single-cell and spatially resolved transcriptomics sample collection during spaceflight,Eliah G. Overbey; Saswati Das; Henry Cope; Pedro Madrigal; Zaneta Andrusivova; Solène Frapard; Rebecca Klotz; Daniela Bezdan; Anjali Gupta; Ryan T. Scott; Jiwoon Park; Dawn Chirko; Jonathan M. Galazka; Sylvain V. Costes; Christopher E. Mason; Raul Herranz; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Joseph Borg; Stefania Giacomello,spaceflight; RNA-sequencing; transcriptomics; single-cell; spatially resolved transcriptomics; spatial,139,"Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT) have experienced rapid development in recent years. The findings of spaceflight-based scRNA-seq and SRT investigations are likely to improve our understanding of life in space and our comprehension of gene expression in various cell systems and tissue dynamics. However, compared to their Earth-based counterparts, gene expression experiments conducted in spaceflight have not experienced the same pace of development. Out of the hundreds of spaceflight gene expression datasets available, only a few used scRNA-seq and SRT. In this perspective piece, we explore the growing importance of scRNA-seq and SRT in space biology and discuss the challenges and considerations relevant to robust experimental design to enable growth of these methods in the field.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9701605/
PMC11166648,Direct RNA sequencing of astronaut blood reveals spaceflight-associated m6A increases and hematopoietic transcriptional responses,Kirill Grigorev; Theodore M. Nelson; Eliah G. Overbey; Nadia Houerbi; JangKeun Kim; Deena Najjar; Namita Damle; Evan E. Afshin; Krista A. Ryon; Jean Thierry-Mieg; Danielle Thierry-Mieg; Ari M. Melnick; Jaime Mateus; Christopher E. Mason,RNA sequencing; Gene expression,69,"The advent of civilian spaceflight challenges scientists to precisely describe the effects of spaceflight on human physiology, particularly at the molecular and cellular level. Newer, nanopore-based sequencing technologies can quantitatively map changes in chemical structure and expression at single molecule resolution across entire isoforms. We perform long-read, direct RNA nanopore sequencing, as well as Ultima high-coverage RNA-sequencing, of whole blood sampled longitudinally from four SpaceX Inspiration4 astronauts at seven timepoints, spanning pre-flight, day of return, and post-flight recovery. We report key genetic pathways, including changes in erythrocyte regulation, stress induction, and immune changes affected by spaceflight. We also present the first m",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166648/
PMC11166662,Collection of biospecimens from the inspiration4 mission establishes the standards for the space omics and medical atlas (SOMA),Eliah G. Overbey; Krista Ryon; JangKeun Kim; Braden T. Tierney; Remi Klotz; Veronica Ortiz; Sean Mullane; Julian C. Schmidt; Matthew MacKay; Namita Damle; Deena Najjar; Irina Matei; Laura Patras; J. Sebastian Garcia Medina; Ashley S. Kleinman; Jeremy Wain Hirschberg; Jacqueline Proszynski; S. Anand Narayanan; Caleb M. Schmidt; Evan E. Afshin; Lucinda Innes; Mateo Mejia Saldarriaga; Michael A. Schmidt; Richard D. Granstein; Bader Shirah; Min Yu; David Lyden; Jaime Mateus; Christopher E. Mason,Molecular biology; Genetics; Biomarkers,83,"The SpaceX Inspiration4 mission provided a unique opportunity to study the impact of spaceflight on the human body. Biospecimen samples were collected from four crew members longitudinally before (Launch: L-92, L-44, L-3 days), during (Flight Day: FD1, FD2, FD3), and after (Return: R + 1, R + 45, R + 82, R + 194 days) spaceflight, spanning a total of 289 days across 2021-2022. The collection process included venous whole blood, capillary dried blood spot cards, saliva, urine, stool, body swabs, capsule swabs, SpaceX Dragon capsule HEPA filter, and skin biopsies. Venous whole blood was further processed to obtain aliquots of serum, plasma, extracellular vesicles and particles, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. In total, 2,911 sample aliquots were shipped to our central lab at Weill Cornell Medicine for downstream assays and biobanking. This paper provides an overview of the extensive biospecimen collection and highlights their processing procedures and long-term biobanking techniques, facilitating future molecular tests and evaluations.As such, this study details a robust framework for obtaining and preserving high-quality human, microbial, and environmental samples for aerospace medicine in the Space Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA) initiative, which can aid future human spaceflight and space biology experiments.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166662/
PMC3838407,Microfluidics-enabled method to identify modes of ,Roy Lycke; Archana Parashar; Santosh Pandey,N/A,0,"The discovery of new drugs is often propelled by the increasing resistance of parasites to existing drugs and the availability of better technology platforms. The area of microfluidics has provided devices for faster screening of compounds, controlled sampling/sorting of whole animals, and automated behavioral pattern recognition. In most microfluidic devices, drug effects on small animals (e.g.,",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3838407/
PMC3748764,Multiparameter Behavioral Analyses Provide Insights to Mechanisms of Cyanide Resistance in ,Jenifer N. Saldanha; Archana Parashar; Santosh Pandey; Jo Anne Powell-Coffman,microfluidics; hypoxia-inducible factor; cyanide toxicity; transcription factor.,0,"Environmental toxicants influence development, behavior, and ultimately survival. The nematode",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3748764/
PMC2925951,Growth Performance and Root Transcriptome Remodeling of Arabidopsis in Response to Mars-Like Levels of Magnesium Sulfate,Anne M. Visscher; Anna-Lisa Paul; Matias Kirst; Charles L. Guy; Andrew C. Schuerger; Robert J. Ferl,N/A,42,"Martian regolith (unconsolidated surface material) is a potential medium for plant growth in bioregenerative life support systems during manned missions on Mars. However, hydrated magnesium sulfate mineral levels in the regolith of Mars can reach as high as 10 wt%, and would be expected to be highly inhibitory to plant growth. Disabling ion transporters AtMRS2-10 and AtSULTR1;2, which are plasma membrane localized in peripheral root cells, is not an effective way to confer tolerance to magnesium sulfate soils. Arabidopsis The results provide a solid basis for the understanding of the metabolic response of plants to elevated magnesium sulfate soils; it is the first transcriptome analysis of plants in this environment. The results foster the development of Mars soil-compatible plants by showing that",2010,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2925951/
PMC3350920,The 14-3-3 proteins of ,John D. Mayfield; Anna-Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl,Chloroplast; photosensory system; plastid; 14-3-3 proteins; root development,46,"The 14-3-3 proteins specifically bind a number of client proteins to influence important pathways, including flowering timing via the photosensory system. For instance, 14-3-3 proteins influence the photosensory system through interactions with Constans (CO) protein. 14-3-3 associations with the photosensory system were further studied in this investigation using 14-3-3 T-DNA insertion mutants to study root and chloroplast development. The 14-3-3 μ T-DNA insertion mutant,",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3350920/
PMC3422896,14-3-3 phosphoprotein interaction networks – does isoform diversity present functional interaction specification?,Anna-Lisa Paul; Fiona C. Denison; Eric R. Schultz; Agata K. Zupanska; Robert J. Ferl,Arabidopsis; GRF; plant; subcellular localization; 14-3-3 isoform specificity,128,"The 14-3-3 proteins have emerged as major phosphoprotein interaction proteins and thereby constitute a key node in the Arabidopsis Interactome Map, a node through which a large number of important signals pass. Throughout their history of discovery and description, the 14-3-3s have been described as protein families and there has been some evidence that the different 14-3-3 family members within any organism might carry isoform-specific functions. However, there has also been evidence for redundancy of 14-3-3 function, suggesting that the perceived 14-3-3 diversity may be the accumulation of neutral mutations over evolutionary time and as some 14-3-3 genes develop tissue or organ-specific expression. This situation has led to a currently unresolved question – does 14-3-3 isoform sequence diversity indicate functional diversity at the biochemical or cellular level? We discuss here some of the key observations on both sides of the resulting debate, and present a set of contrastable observations to address the theory functional diversity does exist among 14-3-3 isoforms. The resulting model suggests strongly that there are indeed functional specificities in the 14-3-3s of Arabidopsis. The model further suggests that 14-3-3 diversity and specificity should enter into the discussion of 14-3-3 roles in signal transduction and be directly approached in 14-3-3 experimentation. It is hoped that future studies involving 14-3-3s will continue to address specificity in experimental design and analysis.",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3422896/
PMC11869762,Ginsenoside Reshapes Intestinal Microecology to Alleviate Microgravity Stress,Yanli Wang; Tian Chen; Zhe Shi; Lijinchuan Dong; Mengting Li; Bo Peng; Qi Li; Ruile Pan; Shuiming Xiao; Qing Yang; Ning Jiang; Xinmin Liu; Qin Hu; Ying Chen,ginseng total saponins; gastrointestinal microbiome; immunity; short-chain fatty acids; weightlessness simulation,55,"During medium- to long-duration spaceflights, real-time microgravity can increase the health risks of astronauts. In particular, the disruption of intestinal homeostasis is closely related to other health problems, and it is necessary to monitor related treatment strategies. Ginseng is a well-known Chinese herbal medicine often used to maintain health. Ginseng total saponins (GTSs), which are the bioactive components of ginseng, have been reported to regulate immune homeostasis, anti-inflammation, and anti-oxidation. This study focused on the regulation of GTSs in intestinal homeostasis imbalance caused by microgravity. A hindlimb suspension (HLS) rat model was established to evaluate the intestinal protective effects of GTSs. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened using RNA-Seq. RT-PCR was performed to further focus and verify these results. The gut microbiome composition was examined based on 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing, and the short-chain fatty acids produced were further analyzed. We found that GTSs intervention effectively improved the intestinal injury caused by simulated weightlessness, including reducing the pathological damage, increasing the expression of tight junction proteins and reducing the levels of inflammatory factors. Moreover, GTSs treatment significantly restored the levels of intestinal immunity-related genes and remodeled the gut microbiota. In particular, GTSs significantly increased the abundance of short-chain fatty acid metabolism-related bacteria, thereby increasing the level of propionic acid, butyric acid, isobutyric acid. Our results revealed that GTSs improved intestinal microecological disorders and impaired immune function caused by the weightlessness simulation. The underlying mechanism may be related to the “intestinal immune -microbiota-metabolic” pathway. These findings provide a theoretical basis for the precise design and development of GTSs for space-health products.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11869762/
PMC10712242,Integrative transcriptomics and proteomics profiling of ,Gbolaga O. Olanrewaju; Natasha J. Haveman; Michael J. Naldrett; Anna-Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl; Sarah E. Wyatt,spaceflight; gravitropism; Arabidopsis; proteomics; RNAseq; TMT; BRIC LED; International Space Station,60,"Spaceflight presents a unique environment with complex stressors, including microgravity and radiation, that can influence plant physiology at molecular levels. Combining transcriptomics and proteomics approaches, this research gives insights into the coordination of transcriptome and proteome in Arabidopsis’ molecular and physiological responses to Spaceflight environmental stress. Arabidopsis seedlings were germinated and grown in microgravity (µ",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10712242/
PMC6143729,Characterization of ,Jillian Romsdahl; Adriana Blachowicz; Abby J. Chiang; Nitin Singh; Jason E. Stajich; Markus Kalkum; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Clay C. C. Wang,International Space Station; phylogenetic analysis; proteomics,76,A thorough understanding of how fungi respond and adapt to the various stimuli encountered during spaceflight presents many economic benefits and is imperative for the health of crew. As,2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6143729/
PMC10058394,,Shih-Heng Su; Howard G. Levine; Patrick H. Masson,Bd21; Bd21-3; Gaz8; microgravity; International Space Station; APEX Growth Unit; VEGGIE; adaptation; seedling growth; transcriptomics,89,"Plants have been recognized as key components of bioregenerative life support systems for space exploration, and many experiments have been carried out to evaluate their adaptability to spaceflight. Unfortunately, few of these experiments have involved monocot plants, which constitute most of the crops used on Earth as sources of food, feed, and fiber. To better understand the ability of monocot plants to adapt to spaceflight, we germinated and grew",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10058394/
PMC4103452,A method for preparing spaceflight RNA,Eric R. Schultz; Karen L. Kelley; Anna-Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl,RNA; scanning electron microscopy; SEM; spaceflight,21,• • •,2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4103452/
PMC8024390,ARG1 Functions in the Physiological Adaptation of Undifferentiated Plant Cells to Spaceflight,Agata K. Zupanska; Eric R. Schultz; JiQiang Yao; Natasha J. Sng; Mingqi Zhou; Jordan B. Callaham; Robert J. Ferl; Anna-Lisa Paul,N/A,0,"Scientific access to spaceflight and especially the International Space Station has revealed that physiological adaptation to spaceflight is accompanied or enabled by changes in gene expression that significantly alter the transcriptome of cells in spaceflight. A wide range of experiments have shown that plant physiological adaptation to spaceflight involves gene expression changes that alter cell wall and other metabolisms. However, while transcriptome profiling aptly illuminates changes in gene expression that accompany spaceflight adaptation, mutation analysis is required to illuminate key elements required for that adaptation. Here we report how transcriptome profiling was used to gain insight into the spaceflight adaptation role of",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8024390/
PMC6348315,A member of the CONSTANS-Like protein family is a putative regulator of reactive oxygen species homeostasis and spaceflight physiological adaptation,Natasha J Sng; Bryan Kolaczkowski; Robert J Ferl; Anna-Lisa Paul,B-box domain; CONSTANS-Like; ecotype-specific; microgravity; reactive oxygen species; spaceflight; transcription factor; uncharacterized genes,88,A feature of the physiological adaptation to spaceflight in,2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6348315/
PMC6359015,HSFA2 Functions in the Physiological Adaptation of Undifferentiated Plant Cells to Spaceflight,Agata K. Zupanska; Collin LeFrois; Robert J. Ferl; Anna-Lisa Paul,spaceflight; plant cell culture; undifferentiated cells; microgravity; heat shock,117,"Heat Shock Factor A2 (HsfA2) is part of the Heat Shock Factor (HSF) network, and plays an essential role beyond heat shock in environmental stress responses and cellular homeostatic control.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6359015/
PMC7667275,Neutrophil-to-Lymphocyte Ratio: A Biomarker to Monitor the Immune Status of Astronauts,Amber M. Paul; Siddhita D. Mhatre; Egle Cekanaviciute; Ann-Sofie Schreurs; Candice G. T. Tahimic; Ruth K. Globus; Sulekha Anand; Brian E. Crucian; Sharmila Bhattacharya,neutrophils; spaceflight; simulated microgravity; NLR; inflammation; oxidative stress response,97,"A comprehensive understanding of spaceflight factors involved in immune dysfunction and the evaluation of biomarkers to assess in-flight astronaut health are essential goals for NASA. An elevated neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) is a potential biomarker candidate, as leukocyte differentials are altered during spaceflight. In the reduced gravity environment of space, rodents and astronauts displayed elevated NLR and granulocyte-to-lymphocyte ratios (GLR), respectively. To simulate microgravity using two well-established ground-based models, we cultured human whole blood-leukocytes in high-aspect rotating wall vessels (HARV-RWV) and used hindlimb unloaded (HU) mice. Both HARV-RWV simulation of leukocytes and HU-exposed mice showed elevated NLR profiles comparable to spaceflight exposed samples. To assess mechanisms involved, we found the simulated microgravity HARV-RWV model resulted in an imbalance of redox processes and activation of myeloperoxidase-producing inflammatory neutrophils, while antioxidant treatment reversed these effects. In the simulated microgravity HU model, mitochondrial catalase-transgenic mice that have reduced oxidative stress responses showed reduced neutrophil counts, NLR, and a dampened release of selective inflammatory cytokines compared to wildtype HU mice, suggesting simulated microgravity induced oxidative stress responses that triggered inflammation. In brief, both spaceflight and simulated microgravity models caused elevated NLR, indicating this as a potential biomarker for future in-flight immune health monitoring.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7667275/
PMC7756144,Beyond Low-Earth Orbit: Characterizing Immune and microRNA Differentials following Simulated Deep Spaceflight Conditions in Mice,Amber M. Paul; Margareth Cheng-Campbell; Elizabeth A. Blaber; Sulekha Anand; Sharmila Bhattacharya; Sara R. Zwart; Brian E. Crucian; Scott M. Smith; Robert Meller; Peter Grabham; Afshin Beheshti,Immunology; Space Sciences,95,"Spaceflight missions can cause immune system dysfunction in astronauts with little understanding of immune outcomes in deep space. This study assessed immune responses in mice following ground-based, simulated deep spaceflight conditions, compared with data from astronauts on International Space Station missions. For ground studies, we simulated microgravity using the hindlimb unloaded mouse model alone or in combination with acute simulated galactic cosmic rays or solar particle events irradiation. Immune profiling results revealed unique immune diversity following each experimental condition, suggesting each stressor results in distinct circulating immune responses, with clear consequences for deep spaceflight. Circulating plasma microRNA sequence analysis revealed involvement in immune system dysregulation. Furthermore, a large astronaut cohort showed elevated inflammation during low-Earth orbit missions, thereby supporting our simulated ground experiments in mice. Herein, circulating immune biomarkers are defined by distinct deep space irradiation types coupled to simulated microgravity and could be targets for future space health initiatives.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7756144/
PMC8169688,Immunological and hematological outcomes following protracted low dose/low dose rate ionizing radiation and simulated microgravity,Amber M. Paul; Eliah G. Overbey; Willian A. da Silveira; Nathaniel Szewczyk; Nina C. Nishiyama; Michael J. Pecaut; Sulekha Anand; Jonathan M. Galazka; Xiao Wen Mao,Gene regulation in immune cells; Immunology; Biomarkers; Computational biology and bioinformatics; Gene regulatory networks,64,"Using a ground-based model to simulate spaceflight [21-days of single-housed, hindlimb unloading (HLU) combined with continuous low-dose gamma irradiation (LDR, total dose of 0.04 Gy)], an in-depth survey of the immune and hematological systems of mice at 7-days post-exposure was performed. Collected blood was profiled with a hematology analyzer and spleens were analyzed by whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing (RNA-sequencing). The results revealed negligible differences in immune differentials. However, hematological system analyses of whole blood indicated large disparities in red blood cell differentials and morphology, suggestive of anemia. Murine Reactome networks indicated majority of spleen cells displayed differentially expressed genes (DEG) involved in signal transduction, metabolism, cell cycle, chromatin organization, and DNA repair. Although immune differentials were not changed, DEG analysis of the spleen revealed expression profiles associated with inflammation and dysregulated immune function persist to 1-week post-simulated spaceflight. Additionally, specific regulation pathways associated with human blood disease gene orthologs, such as blood pressure regulation, transforming growth factor-β receptor signaling, and B cell differentiation were noted. Collectively, this study revealed differential immune and hematological outcomes 1-week post-simulated spaceflight conditions, suggesting recovery from spaceflight is an unremitting process.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8169688/
PMC8475764,Epigenomic Regulators ,Anna-Lisa Paul; Natasha Haveman; Brandon Califar; Robert J. Ferl,spaceflight adaptation; DNA methylation; epigenetic; space biology; microgravity; elongator complex subunit 2; methyltransferase 1; methylation mutants,103,N/A,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8475764/
PMC9098553,Plants grown in Apollo lunar regolith present stress-associated transcriptomes that inform prospects for lunar exploration,Anna-Lisa Paul; Stephen M. Elardo; Robert Ferl,Abiotic; Transcriptomics; Plant molecular biology,57,"The extent to which plants can enhance human life support on other worlds depends on the ability of plants to thrive in extraterrestrial environments using in-situ resources. Using samples from Apollo 11, 12, and 17, we show that the terrestrial plant",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9098553/
PMC10503492,Artificial Gravity Partially Protects Space-induced Neurological Deficits in ,Siddhita D. Mhatre; Janani Iyer; Juli Petereit; Roberta M. Dolling-Boreham; Anastasia Tyryshkina; Amber Paul; Rachel Gilbert; Matthew Jensen; Rebekah J. Woolsey; Sulekha Anand; Marianne B. Sowa; David R. Quilici; Sylvain V. Costes; Santhosh Girirajan; Sharmila Bhattacharya,N/A,0,"Spaceflight poses risks to the central nervous system (CNS), and understanding neurological responses is important for future missions. We report CNS changes in",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10503492/
PMC9693084,Utilizing the KSC Fixation Tube to Conduct Human-Tended Plant Biology Experiments on a Suborbital Spaceflight,Natasha J. Haveman; Mingqi Zhou; Jordan Callaham; Hunter F. Strickland; Donald Houze; Susan Manning-Roach; Gerard Newsham; Anna-Lisa Paul; Robert J. Ferl,suborbital space; KSC fixation tubes; RNA-seq; arabidopsis; transcriptomics,26,"Suborbital spaceflights now enable human-tended research investigating short-term gravitational effects in biological systems, eliminating the need for complex automation. Here, we discuss a method utilizing KSC Fixation Tubes (KFTs) to both carry biology to suborbital space as well as fix that biology at certain stages of flight. Plants on support media were inserted into the sample side of KFTs preloaded with RNAlater in the fixation chamber. The KFTs were activated at various stages of a simulated flight to fix the plants. RNA-seq analysis conducted on tissue samples housed in KFTs, showed that plants behaved consistently in KFTs when compared to petri-plates. Over the time course, roots adjusted to hypoxia and leaves adjusted to changes in photosynthesis. These responses were due in part to the environment imposed by the encased triple containment of the KFTs, which is a requirement for flight in human spacecraft. While plants exhibited expected reproducible transcriptomic alteration over time in the KFTs, responses to clinorotation during the simulated flight suggest that transcriptomic responses to suborbital spaceflight can be examined using this approach.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9693084/
PMC3792163,Correction: Changes in Mouse Thymus and Spleen after Return from the STS-135 Mission in Space,Daila S. Gridley; Xiao Wen Mao; Louis S. Stodieck; Virginia L. Ferguson; Ted A. Bateman; Maria Moldovan; Christopher E. Cunningham; Tamako A. Jones; Jerry M. Slater; Michael J. Pecaut,N/A,0,N/A,2013,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3792163/
PMC4430214,Post-Spaceflight (STS-135) Mouse Splenocytes Demonstrate Altered Activation Properties and Surface Molecule Expression,Shen-An Hwang; Brian Crucian; Clarence Sams; Jeffrey K. Actor,N/A,64,Alterations in immune function have been documented during or post-spaceflight and in ground based models of microgravity. Identification of immune parameters that are dysregulated during spaceflight is an important step in mitigating crew health risks during deep space missions. The,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4430214/
PMC5045078,Changes in the distribution and function of leukocytes after whole-body iron ion irradiation,Daila S. Gridley; Michael J. Pecaut,particle radiation; total-body irradiation; hematopoiesis; mouse model; spaceflight,70,High-energy particle radiation could have a considerable impact on health during space missions. This study evaluated C57BL/6 mice on Day 40 after total-body,2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5045078/
PMC5443495,Is spaceflight-induced immune dysfunction linked to systemic changes in metabolism?,Michael J. Pecaut; Xiao Wen Mao; Denise L. Bellinger; Karen R. Jonscher; Louis S. Stodieck; Virginia L. Ferguson; Ted A. Bateman; Robert P. Mohney; Daila S. Gridley,N/A,84,The Space Shuttle,2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5443495/
PMC5666744,Spaceflight Activates Autophagy Programs and the Proteasome in Mouse Liver,Elizabeth A. Blaber; Michael J. Pecaut; Karen R. Jonscher,spaceflight; autophagy; proteasome; metabolomics; tRNA biosynthesis; senescence,65,"Increased oxidative stress is an unavoidable consequence of exposure to the space environment. Our previous studies showed that mice exposed to space for 13.5 days had decreased glutathione levels, suggesting impairments in oxidative defense. Here we performed unbiased, unsupervised and integrated multi-‘omic analyses of metabolomic and transcriptomic datasets from mice flown aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis. Enrichment analyses of metabolite and gene sets showed significant changes in osmolyte concentrations and pathways related to glycerophospholipid and sphingolipid metabolism, likely consequences of relative dehydration of the spaceflight mice. However, we also found increased enrichment of aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis and purine metabolic pathways, concomitant with enrichment of genes associated with autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome. When taken together with a downregulation in nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2-mediated signaling, our analyses suggest that decreased hepatic oxidative defense may lead to aberrant tRNA post-translational processing, induction of degradation programs and senescence-associated mitochondrial dysfunction in response to the spaceflight environment.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5666744/
PMC5865701,Vive la radiorésistance!: converging research in radiobiology and biogerontology to enhance human radioresistance for deep space exploration and colonization,Franco Cortese; Dmitry Klokov; Andreyan Osipov; Jakub Stefaniak; Alexey Moskalev; Jane Schastnaya; Charles Cantor; Alexander Aliper; Polina Mamoshina; Igor Ushakov; Alex Sapetsky; Quentin Vanhaelen; Irina Alchinova; Mikhail Karganov; Olga Kovalchuk; Ruth Wilkins; Andrey Shtemberg; Marjan Moreels; Sarah Baatout; Evgeny Izumchenko; João Pedro de Magalhães; Artem V. Artemov; Sylvain V. Costes; Afshin Beheshti; Xiao Wen Mao; Michael J. Pecaut; Dmitry Kaminskiy; Ivan V. Ozerov; Morten Scheibye-Knudsen; Alex Zhavoronkov,radioresistance; space exploration; longevity; DNA damage; Mars mission,289,"While many efforts have been made to pave the way toward human space colonization, little consideration has been given to the methods of protecting spacefarers against harsh cosmic and local radioactive environments and the high costs associated with protection from the deleterious physiological effects of exposure to high-Linear energy transfer (high-LET) radiation. Herein, we lay the foundations of a roadmap toward enhancing human radioresistance for the purposes of deep space colonization and exploration. We outline future research directions toward the goal of enhancing human radioresistance, including upregulation of endogenous repair and radioprotective mechanisms, possible leeways into gene therapy in order to enhance radioresistance via the translation of exogenous and engineered DNA repair and radioprotective mechanisms, the substitution of organic molecules with fortified isoforms, and methods of slowing metabolic activity while preserving cognitive function. We conclude by presenting the known associations between radioresistance and longevity, and articulating the position that enhancing human radioresistance is likely to extend the healthspan of human spacefarers as well.",2018,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5865701/
PMC6337482,Proteomic Analysis of Mouse Brain Subjected to Spaceflight,Xiao Wen Mao; Lawrence B. Sandberg; Daila S. Gridley; E. Clifford Herrmann; Guangyu Zhang; Ravi Raghavan; Roman A. Zubarev; Bo Zhang; Louis S. Stodieck; Virginia L. Ferguson; Ted A. Bateman; Michael J. Pecaut,brain; spaceflight; microgravity; proteomics,103,"There is evidence that spaceflight poses acute and late risks to the central nervous system. To explore possible mechanisms, the proteomic changes following spaceflight in mouse brain were characterized. Space Shuttle Atlantis (STS-135) was launched from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on a 13-day mission. Within 3–5 h after landing, brain tissue was collected to evaluate protein expression profiles using quantitative proteomic analysis. Our results showed that there were 26 proteins that were significantly altered after spaceflight in the gray and/or white matter. While there was no overlap between the white and gray matter in terms of individual proteins, there was overlap in terms of function, synaptic plasticity, vesical activity, protein/organelle transport, and metabolism. Our data demonstrate that exposure to the spaceflight environment induces significant changes in protein expression related to neuronal structure and metabolic function. This might lead to a significant impact on brain structural and functional integrity that could affect the outcome of space missions.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6337482/
PMC9953463,Transcriptomic Effects on the Mouse Heart Following 30 Days on the International Space Station,Alicia L. Veliz; Lana Mamoun; Lorelei Hughes; Richard Vega; Bailey Holmes; Andrea Monteon; Jillian Bray; Michael J. Pecaut; Mary Kearns-Jonker,International Space Station; spaceflight; transcriptomics; cardiovascular system; RNA sequencing; adaptive response; signaling; oxidative stress,60,"Efforts to understand the impact of spaceflight on the human body stem from growing interest in long-term space travel. Multiple organ systems are affected by microgravity and radiation, including the cardiovascular system. Previous transcriptomic studies have sought to reveal the changes in gene expression after spaceflight. However, little is known about the impact of long-term spaceflight on the mouse heart in vivo. This study focuses on the transcriptomic changes in the hearts of female C57BL/6J mice flown on the International Space Station (ISS) for 30 days. RNA was isolated from the hearts of three flight and three comparable ground control mice and RNA sequencing was performed. Our analyses showed that 1147 transcripts were significantly regulated after spaceflight. The MAPK, PI3K-Akt, and GPCR signaling pathways were predicted to be activated. Transcripts related to cytoskeleton breakdown and organization were upregulated, but no significant change in the expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) components or oxidative stress pathway-associated transcripts occurred. Our results indicate an absence of cellular senescence, and a significant upregulation of transcripts associated with the cell cycle. Transcripts related to cellular maintenance and survival were most affected by spaceflight, suggesting that cardiovascular transcriptome initiates an adaptive response to long-term spaceflight.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9953463/
PMC10487739,Spaceflight-Induced Gene Expression Profiles in the Mouse Brain Are Attenuated by Treatment with the Antioxidant BuOE,Isaac Kremsky; Samir Ali; Seta Stanbouly; Jacob Holley; Stephen Justinen; Michael Pecaut; James Crapo; Xiaowen Mao,spaceflight; brain; digital spatial profiling; gene expression; regional difference,68,"The demands of deep space pose a health risk to the central nervous system that has long been a concern when sending humans to space. While little is known about how spaceflight affects transcription spatially in the brain, a greater understanding of this process has the potential to aid strategies that mitigate the effects of spaceflight on the brain. Therefore, we performed GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiling of mouse brains subjected to either spaceflight or grounded controls. Four brain regions were selected: Cortex, Frontal Cortex, Corunu Ammonis I, and Dentate Gyrus. Antioxidants have emerged as a potential means of attenuating the effects of spaceflight, so we treated a subset of the mice with a superoxide dismutase mimic, MnTnBuOE-2-PyP 5+ (BuOE). Our analysis revealed hundreds of differentially expressed genes due to spaceflight in each of the four brain regions. Both common and region-specific transcriptomic responses were observed. Metabolic pathways and pathways sensitive to oxidative stress were enriched in the four brain regions due to spaceflight. These findings enhance our understanding of brain regional variation in susceptibility to spaceflight conditions. BuOE reduced the transcriptomic effects of spaceflight at a large number of genes, suggesting that this compound may attenuate oxidative stress-induced brain damage caused by the spaceflight environment.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10487739/
PMC11942576,Genome-Wide Analysis of the ,Zeyu Zhang; Tongyu Fu; Cong Zhou; Fan Liu; Lingyi Zeng; Li Ren; Chaobo Tong; Lijiang Liu; Li Xu,receptor-like kinase; hormones; clubroot disease,57,The proline-rich extensin-like receptor kinase (,2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11942576/
PMC4052902,Phosphoinositide-signaling is one component of a robust plant defense response,Chiu-Yueh Hung; Peter Aspesi Jr; Melissa R. Hunter; Aaron W. Lomax; Imara Y. Perera,Arabidopsis; Ca; salicylic acid; phosphoinositides; InsP; plant defense signaling; SAR,97,"The phosphoinositide pathway and inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate (InsP",2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4052902/
PMC8539686,Uncovering Transcriptional Responses to Fractional Gravity in ,James Sheppard; Eric S. Land; Tiffany Aurora Toennisson; Colleen J. Doherty; Imara Y. Perera,spaceflight; fractional gravity; RNA-seq; Arabidopsis; gene expression; heat shock proteins,74,Although many reports characterize the transcriptional response of,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8539686/
PMC10800490,Conserved plant transcriptional responses to microgravity from two consecutive spaceflight experiments,Eric S. Land; James Sheppard; Colleen J. Doherty; Imara Y. Perera,transcriptional profiling; adaptation to spaceflight; Arabidopsis; microgravity (μ; plants,86,"Understanding how plants adapt to the space environment is essential, as plants will be a valuable component of long duration space missions. Several spaceflight experiments have focused on transcriptional profiling as a means of understanding plant adaptation to microgravity. However, there is limited overlap between results from different experiments. Differences in experimental conditions and hardware make it difficult to find a consistent response across experiments and to distinguish the primary effects of microgravity from other spaceflight effects. Plant Signaling (PS) and Plant RNA Regulation (PRR) were two separate spaceflight experiments conducted on the International Space Station utilizing the European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS). The EMCS provided a lighted environment for plant growth with centrifugal capabilities providing an onboard 1 An RNA-Seq analysis of shoot samples from PS and PRR revealed a significant overlap of genes differentially expressed in microgravity between the two experiments. Relative to onboard 1",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10800490/
PMC7756143,RNAseq Analysis of Rodent Spaceflight Experiments Is Confounded by Sample Collection Techniques,San-Huei Lai Polo; Amanda M. Saravia-Butler; Valery Boyko; Marie T. Dinh; Yi-Chun Chen; Homer Fogle; Sigrid S. Reinsch; Shayoni Ray; Kaushik Chakravarty; Oana Marcu; Rick B. Chen; Sylvain V. Costes; Jonathan M. Galazka,Transcriptomics; Space Sciences,38,"To understand the physiological changes that occur in response to spaceflight, mice are transported to the International Space Station (ISS) and housed for variable periods of time before euthanasia on-orbit or return to Earth. Sample collection under such difficult conditions introduces confounding factors that need to be identified and addressed. We found large changes in the transcriptome of mouse tissues dissected and preserved on-orbit compared with tissues from mice euthanized on-orbit, preserved, and dissected after return to Earth. Changes due to preservation method eclipsed those between flight and ground samples, making it difficult to identify spaceflight-specific changes. Follow-on experiments to interrogate the roles of euthanasia methods, tissue and carcass preservation protocols, and library preparation methods suggested that differences due to preservation protocols are exacerbated when coupled with polyA selection. This has important implications for the interpretation of existing datasets and the design of future experiments.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7756143/
PMC3066201,Functional Changes in the Snail Statocyst System Elicited by Microgravity,Pavel M. Balaban; Aleksey Y. Malyshev; Victor N. Ierusalimsky; Nikolay Aseyev; Tania A. Korshunova; Natasha I. Bravarenko; M. S. Lemak; Matvey Roshchin; Igor S. Zakharov; Yekaterina Popova; Richard Boyle,N/A,76,"The mollusk statocyst is a mechanosensing organ detecting the animal's orientation with respect to gravity. This system has clear similarities to its vertebrate counterparts: a weight-lending mass, an epithelial layer containing small supporting cells and the large sensory hair cells, and an output eliciting compensatory body reflexes to perturbations. In terrestrial gastropod snail we studied the impact of 16- (Foton M-2) and 12-day (Foton M-3) exposure to microgravity in unmanned orbital missions on: (i) the whole animal behavior ( Upregulation of statocyst function in snails following microgravity exposure parallels that observed in vertebrates suggesting fundamental principles underlie gravi-sensing and the organism's ability to adapt to gravity changes. This simple animal model offers the possibility to describe general subcellular mechanisms of nervous system's response to conditions on Earth and in space.",2011,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3066201/
PMC11324864,Simulated microgravity impairs human NK cell cytotoxic activity against space radiation-relevant leukemic cells,Bradford M. Kuhlman; Jonathan H. Diaz; Trang Simon; Kimberly D. Reeves; Stephen J. Walker; Anthony Atala; Graça Almeida-Porada; Christopher D. Porada,Tumour immunology; Haematological cancer,67,"Natural killer (NK) cells are an important first-line of defense against malignant cells. Because of the potential for increased cancer risk from astronaut exposure to space radiation, we determined whether microgravity present during spaceflight affects the body’s defenses against leukemogenesis. Human NK cells were cultured for 48 h under normal gravity and simulated microgravity (sμG), and cytotoxicity against K-562 (CML) and MOLT-4 (T-ALL) cells was measured using standard methodology or under continuous sμG. This brief exposure to sμG markedly reduced NK cytotoxicity against both leukemias, and these deleterious effects were more pronounced in continuous sμG. RNA-seq performed on NK cells from two additional healthy donors provided insight into the mechanism(s) by which sμG reduced cytotoxicity. Given our prior report of space radiation-induced human T-ALL in vivo, the reduced cytotoxicity against MOLT-4 is striking and raises the possibility that μG may increase astronaut risk of leukemogenesis during prolonged missions beyond LEO.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11324864/
PMC3665236,Multi-analyte Biochip (MAB) Based on All-solid-state Ion-selective Electrodes (ASSISE) for Physiological Research,Wan W. Amani Wan Salim; Michael A. Zeitchek; Andrew C. Hermann; Antonio J. Ricco; Ming Tan; Florian Selch; Erich Fleming; Brad M. Bebout; Mamoun M. Bader; Aeraj ul Haque; D. Marshall Porterfield,"Bioengineering; Issue 74; Medicine; Biomedical Engineering; Chemical Engineering; Electrical Engineering; Mechanical Engineering; Chemistry; Biochemistry; Anatomy; Physiology; Miniaturization; Microtechnology; Electrochemical Techniques; electrochemical processes; astrobiology; Analytical; Diagnostic and Therapeutic Techniques and Equipment; Investigative Techniques; Technology; Industry; Agriculture; electrochemical sensor; all-solid-state ion-selective electrode (ASSISE); conductive polymer transducer; poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT); lab-on-a-chip; Chlorella vulgaris; photosynthesis; microfluidics",0,"Lab-on-a-chip (LOC) applications in environmental, biomedical, agricultural, biological, and spaceflight research require an ion-selective electrode (ISE) that can withstand prolonged storage in complex biological media The lifetime of an ASSISE is found to depend on maintaining the potential at the conductive layer/membrane interface Calibrations in test solutions demonstrated that the MAB can monitor pH (operational range pH 4-9), CO The MAB conveys an advantage in size, versatility, and multiplexed analyte sensing capability, making it applicable to many confined monitoring situations, on Earth or in space. The biochip is 10 x 11 mm in dimension and has 9 ASSISEs designated as working electrodes (WEs) and 5 Ag/AgCl reference electrodes (REs). Each working electrode (WE) is 240 μm in diameter and is equally spaced at 1.4 mm from the REs, which are 480 μm in diameter. These electrodes are connected to electrical contact pads with a dimension of 0.5 mm x 0.5 mm. The schematic is shown in Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic deposition methods are used to electropolymerize the PEDOT films using a Bioanalytical Systems Inc. (BASI) C3 cell stand ( The MAB is contained in a microfluidic flow-cell chamber filled with a 150 μl volume of algal medium; the contact pads are electrically connected to the BASI system (",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3665236/
PMC10470837,Reviewing the state of biosensors and lab-on-a- chip technologies: opportunities for extreme environments and space exploration,Stefano Cinti; Sima Singh; Giovanni Covone; Luca Tonietti; Annarita Ricciardelli; Angelina Cordone; Roberta Iacono; Arianna Mazzoli; Marco Moracci; Alessandra Rotundi; Donato Giovannelli,biosensors; point of care; lab on chip; space exploration; extreme environment,71,"The space race is entering a new era of exploration, in which the number of robotic and human missions to various places in our solar system is rapidly increasing. Despite the recent advances in propulsion and life support technologies, there is a growing need to perform analytical measurements and laboratory experiments across diverse domains of science, while keeping low payload requirements. In this context, lab-on-a-chip nanobiosensors appear to be an emerging technology capable of revolutionizing space exploration, given their low footprint, high accuracy, and low payload requirements. To date, only some approaches for monitoring astronaut health in spacecraft environments have been reported. Although non-invasive molecular diagnostics, like lab-on-a-chip technology, are expected to improve the quality of long-term space missions, their application to monitor microbiological and environmental variables is rarely reported, even for analogous extreme environments on Earth. The possibility of evaluating the occurrence of unknown or unexpected species, identifying redox gradients relevant to microbial metabolism, or testing for specific possible biosignatures, will play a key role in the future of space microbiology. In this review, we will examine the current and potential roles of lab-on-a-chip technology in space exploration and in extreme environment investigation, reporting what has been tested so far, and clarifying the direction toward which the newly developed technologies of portable lab-on-a-chip sensors are heading for exploration in extreme environments and in space.",2023,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10470837/
PMC10386755,Sequencing the Genomes of the First Terrestrial Fungal Lineages: What Have We Learned?,Andrii P. Gryganskyi; Jacob Golan; Anna Muszewska; Alexander Idnurm; Somayeh Dolatabadi; Stephen J. Mondo; Vira B. Kutovenko; Volodymyr O. Kutovenko; Michael T. Gajdeczka; Iryna M. Anishchenko; Julia Pawlowska; Ngoc Vinh Tran; Ingo Ebersberger; Kerstin Voigt; Yan Wang; Ying Chang; Teresa E. Pawlowska; Joseph Heitman; Rytas Vilgalys; Gregory Bonito; Gerald L. Benny; Matthew E. Smith; Nicole Reynolds; Timothy Y. James; Igor V. Grigoriev; Joseph W. Spatafora; Jason E. Stajich,fungal evolution; ecological relevance; saprotrophs; pathogens; model organisms,190,The first genome sequenced of a eukaryotic organism was for,2023,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10386755/
PMC8896891,The interaction of vortical flows with red cells in venous valve mimics,Zyrina Alura C. Sanchez; Vignesha Vijayananda; Devin M. Virassammy; Liat Rosenfeld; Anand K. Ramasubramanian,N/A,0,"The motion of cells orthogonal to the direction of main flow is of importance in natural and engineered systems. The lateral movement of red blood cells (RBCs) distal to sudden expansion is considered to influence the formation and progression of thrombosis in venous valves, aortic aneurysms, and blood-circulating devices and is also a determining parameter for cell separation applications in flow-focusing microfluidic devices. Although it is known that the unique geometry of venous valves alters the blood flow patterns and cell distribution in venous valve sinuses, the interactions between fluid flow and RBCs have not been elucidated. Here, using a dilute cell suspension in an",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8896891/
PMC8430797,Mammalian and Invertebrate Models as Complementary Tools for Gaining Mechanistic Insight on Muscle Responses to Spaceflight,Thomas Cahill; Henry Cope; Joseph J. Bass; Eliah G. Overbey; Rachel Gilbert; Willian Abraham da Silveira; Amber M. Paul; Tejaswini Mishra; Raúl Herranz; Sigrid S. Reinsch; Sylvain V. Costes; Gary Hardiman; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Candice G. T. Tahimic,spaceflight; muscle; transcriptomics; bedrest; hindlimb unloading; microgravity; animal models; cross-species comparison,158,"Bioinformatics approaches have proven useful in understanding biological responses to spaceflight. Spaceflight experiments remain resource intensive and rare. One outstanding issue is how to maximize scientific output from a limited number of omics datasets from traditional animal models including nematodes, fruitfly, and rodents. The utility of omics data from invertebrate models in anticipating mammalian responses to spaceflight has not been fully explored. Hence, we performed comparative analyses of transcriptomes of soleus and extensor digitorum longus (EDL) in mice that underwent 37 days of spaceflight. Results indicate shared stress responses and altered circadian rhythm. EDL showed more robust growth signals and",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8430797/
PMC5460135,Investigation of simulated microgravity effects on ,Silvia S. Orsini; April M. Lewis; Kelly C. Rice,N/A,72,"Astronauts have been previously shown to exhibit decreased salivary lysozyme and increased dental calculus and gingival inflammation in response to space flight, host factors that could contribute to oral diseases such as caries and periodontitis. However, the specific physiological response of caries-causing bacteria such as",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5460135/
PMC10774393,Altered quorum sensing and physiology of ,Matthew R. Hauserman; Mariola J. Ferraro; Ronan K. Carroll; Kelly C. Rice,Microbiology; Molecular biology,89,N/A,2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10774393/
PMC6126739,"Phosphoinositides control the localization of HOPS subunit VPS41, which together with VPS33 mediates vacuole fusion in plants",Carla Brillada; Jiameng Zheng; Falco Krüger; Eliezer Rovira-Diaz; Jana Christin Askani; Karin Schumacher; Marcela Rojas-Pierce,vacuole fusion; HOPS; SNARE; phosphoinositides,0,"Plant vacuoles are essential organelles and occupy up to 90% of the cell volume. Their roles include regulation of stomata movements, protein storage in seeds, gravity sensing, and ion homeostasis. Vacuole or lysosome fusion in eukaryotes is mediated by two multisubunit complexes, SNARE and homotypic fusion and vacuolar protein sorting (HOPS), but only the SNARE complex is well characterized in plants. Here, we show that, similar to other eukaryotes, HOPS mediates vacuole fusion in plants by interaction with SNAREs and that the HOPS subunit VPS33 and the SNARE protein SYP22 display the sites for interaction between these complexes. In contrast to other eukaryotes, however, plant HOPS recruitment to liposomes is inhibited by phosphoinositides, which appear to define strict rules for regulating fusion and fragmentation of dynamic vacuoles.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6126739/
PMC4411111,REGULATOR OF BULB BIOGENESIS1 (RBB1) Is Involved in Vacuole Bulb Formation in Arabidopsis,Sang Won Han; Jose M. Alonso; Marcela Rojas-Pierce,N/A,53,Vacuoles are dynamic compartments with constant fluctuations and transient structures such as trans-vacuolar strands and bulbs. Bulbs are highly dynamic spherical structures inside vacuoles that are formed by multiple layers of membranes and are continuous with the main tonoplast. We recently carried out a screen for mutants with abnormal trafficking to the vacuole or aberrant vacuole morphology. We characterized,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4411111/
PMC6126739,"Phosphoinositides control the localization of HOPS subunit VPS41, which together with VPS33 mediates vacuole fusion in plants",Carla Brillada; Jiameng Zheng; Falco Krüger; Eliezer Rovira-Diaz; Jana Christin Askani; Karin Schumacher; Marcela Rojas-Pierce,vacuole fusion; HOPS; SNARE; phosphoinositides,0,"Plant vacuoles are essential organelles and occupy up to 90% of the cell volume. Their roles include regulation of stomata movements, protein storage in seeds, gravity sensing, and ion homeostasis. Vacuole or lysosome fusion in eukaryotes is mediated by two multisubunit complexes, SNARE and homotypic fusion and vacuolar protein sorting (HOPS), but only the SNARE complex is well characterized in plants. Here, we show that, similar to other eukaryotes, HOPS mediates vacuole fusion in plants by interaction with SNAREs and that the HOPS subunit VPS33 and the SNARE protein SYP22 display the sites for interaction between these complexes. In contrast to other eukaryotes, however, plant HOPS recruitment to liposomes is inhibited by phosphoinositides, which appear to define strict rules for regulating fusion and fragmentation of dynamic vacuoles.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6126739/
PMC9445043,Microgravity enhances the phenotype of ,Mengying Wang; Katherine Danz; Vanessa Ly; Marcela Rojas-Pierce,Plant sciences; Cell biology,64,"The spaceflight environment of the International Space Station poses a multitude of stresses on plant growth including reduced gravity. Plants exposed to microgravity and other conditions on the ISS display root skewing, changes in gene expression and protein abundance that may result in changes in cell wall composition, antioxidant accumulation and modification of growth anisotropy. Systematic studies that address the effects of microgravity on cellular organelles are lacking but altered numbers and sizes of vacuoles have been detected in previous flights. The prominent size of plant vacuoles makes them ideal models to study organelle dynamics in space. Here, we used",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9445043/
PMC3509447,Hypergravity disruption of homeorhetic adaptations to lactation in rat dams include changes in circadian clocks,Theresa Casey; Elzbieta I. Zakrzewska; Rhonda L. Maple; Laura Lintault; Charles E. Wade; Lisa A. Baer; April E. Ronca; Karen Plaut,Circadian; Hypergravity; Homeorhesis; Lactation; Mammary; Pregnancy,76,"Altered gravity load induced by spaceflight (microgravity) and centrifugation (hypergravity) is associated with changes in circadian, metabolic, and reproductive systems. Exposure to 2-g hypergravity (HG) during pregnancy and lactation decreased rate of mammary metabolic activity and increased pup mortality. We hypothesize HG disrupted maternal homeorhetic responses to pregnancy and lactation are due to changes in maternal metabolism, hormone concentrations, and maternal behavior related to gravity induced alterations in circadian clocks. Effect of HG exposure on mammary, liver and adipose tissue metabolism, plasma hormones and maternal behavior were analyzed in rat dams from mid-pregnancy (Gestational day [G]11) through early lactation (Postnatal day [P]3); comparisons were made across five time-points: G20, G21, P0 (labor and delivery), P1 and P3. Blood, mammary, liver, and adipose tissue were collected for analyzing plasma hormones, glucose oxidation to CO",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3509447/
PMC5600826,Intrauterine exposure to maternal stress alters ,Jennifer Blaze; Arun Asok; Kristyn Borrelli; Christina Tulbert; Justin Bollinger; April E. Ronca; Tania L. Roth,prenatal stress; maternal stress; DNA methylation; telomere length,0,"DNA methylation (addition of methyl groups to cytosines) and changes in telomere length (TTAGGG repeats on the ends of chromosomes) are two molecular modifications that result from stress and could contribute to the long-term effects of intrauterine exposure to maternal stress on offspring behavior. Here, we measured methylation of DNA associated with the Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) gene, a gene important in development and plasticity, and telomere length in the brains of adult rat male and female offspring whose mothers were exposed to unpredictable and variable stressors throughout gestation. Males exposed to prenatal stress had greater methylation (",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5600826/
PMC10831389,Sex differences in muscle health in simulated micro- and partial-gravity environments in rats,Megan E. Rosa-Caldwell; Marie Mortreux; Anna Wadhwa; Ursula B. Kaiser; Dong-Min Sung; Mary L. Bouxsein; Seward B. Rutkove,Sex differences; Atrophy; Muscle strength; Plantar flexion; Dorsiflexion,31,"Skeletal muscle size and strength are important for overall health for astronauts. However, how male and female muscle may respond differently to micro- and partial-gravity environments is not fully understood. The purpose of this study was to determine how biological sex and sex steroid hormones influence the progression of muscle atrophy after long term exposure to micro and partial gravity environments in male and female rats. Male and female Fisher rats (",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10831389/
PMC10831389,Sex differences in muscle health in simulated micro- and partial-gravity environments in rats,Megan E. Rosa-Caldwell; Marie Mortreux; Anna Wadhwa; Ursula B. Kaiser; Dong-Min Sung; Mary L. Bouxsein; Seward B. Rutkove,Sex differences; Atrophy; Muscle strength; Plantar flexion; Dorsiflexion,31,"Skeletal muscle size and strength are important for overall health for astronauts. However, how male and female muscle may respond differently to micro- and partial-gravity environments is not fully understood. The purpose of this study was to determine how biological sex and sex steroid hormones influence the progression of muscle atrophy after long term exposure to micro and partial gravity environments in male and female rats. Male and female Fisher rats (",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10831389/
PMC4507784,Brassinazole resistant 1 (BZR1)-dependent brassinosteroid signalling pathway leads to ectopic activation of quiescent cell division and suppresses columella stem cell differentiation,Hak-Soo Lee; Yoon Kim; Giang Pham; Ju Won Kim; Ji-Hye Song; Yew Lee; Yong-Sic Hwang; Stanley J. Roux; Soo-Hwan Kim,Auxin; brassinosteroid; BZR1; columella stem cell; PINs; quiescent centre (QC); root apical meristem; root development.,61,Brassinosteroids (BRs) lead to ectopic activation of quiescent centre division as well as modulation of the columella stem cells differentiation in,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4507784/
PMC4349987,Proteomic Study of Microsomal Proteins Reveals a Key Role for ,Xu Wang; Xiaolong Ma; Hui Wang; Bingjie Li; Greg Clark; Yi Guo; Stan Roux; Daye Sun; Wenqiang Tang,N/A,0,"To understand the early signaling steps in the response of plant cells to increased environmental temperature, 2-D difference gel electrophoresis was used to study the proteins in microsomes of",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4349987/
PMC6638264,Apyrase inhibitors enhance the ability of diverse fungicides to inhibit the growth of different plant‐pathogenic fungi,Manas Kumar Tripathy; Gayani Weeraratne; Greg Clark; Stanley J. Roux,ABC transporters; copper octanoate; myclobutanil; plant pathogens; propiconazole,0,"A previous study has demonstrated that the treatment of Arabidopsis plants with chemical inhibitors of apyrase enzymes increases their sensitivity to herbicides. In this study, we found that the addition of the same or related apyrase inhibitors could potentiate the ability of different fungicides to inhibit the growth of five different pathogenic fungi in plate growth assays. The growth of all five fungi was partially inhibited by three commonly used fungicides: copper octanoate, myclobutanil and propiconazole. However, when these fungicides were individually tested in combination with any one of four different apyrase inhibitors (AI.1, AI.10, AI.13 or AI.15), their potency to inhibit the growth of five fungal pathogens was increased significantly relative to their application alone. The apyrase inhibitors were most effective in potentiating the ability of copper octanoate to inhibit fungal growth, and least effective in combination with propiconazole. Among the five pathogens assayed, that most sensitive to the fungicide‐potentiating effects of the inhibitors was",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6638264/
PMC6130020,ANN1 and ANN2 Function in Post-Phloem Sugar Transport in Root Tips to Affect Primary Root Growth,Jing Wang; Jawon Song; Greg Clark; Stanley J. Roux,N/A,0,ANN1 and ANN2 regulate Arabidopsis primary root growth by facilitating post-phloem transport of sugar in root tips.,2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6130020/
PMC9695374,Mitochondria-Targeted Human Catalase in the Mouse Longevity MCAT Model Mitigates Head-Tilt Bedrest-Induced Neuro-Inflammation in the Hippocampus,Linda Rubinstein; Frederico Kiffer; Stephanie Puukila; Moniece G. Lowe; Brie Goo; Amalia Luthens; Ann-Sofie Schreurs; Samantha M. Torres; Sonette Steczina; Candice G. T. Tahimic; Antiño R. Allen,microgravity; CNS; hind limb unloading; microglia; ROS; MCAT,73,"Microgravity (modeled by head-tilt bedrest and hind-limb unloading), experienced during prolonged spaceflight, results in neurological consequences, central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, and potentially impairment during the performance of critical tasks. Similar pathologies are observed in bedrest, sedentary lifestyle, and muscle disuse on Earth. In our previous study, we saw that head-tilt bedrest together with social isolation upregulated the milieu of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the hippocampus and plasma. These changes were mitigated in a MCAT mouse model overexpressing human catalase in the mitochondria, pointing out the importance of ROS signaling in this stress response. Here, we used a head-tilt model in socially housed mice to tease out the effects of head-tilt bedrest without isolation. In order to find the underlying molecular mechanisms that provoked the cytokine response, we measured CD68, an indicator of microglial activation in the hippocampus, as well as changes in normal in-cage behavior. We hypothesized that hindlimb unloading (HU) will elicit microglial hippocampal activations, which will be mitigated in the MCAT ROS-quenching mice model. Indeed, we saw an elevation of the activated microglia CD68 marker following HU in the hippocampus, and this pathology was mitigated in MCAT mice. Additionally, we identified cytokines in the hippocampus, which had significant positive correlations with CD68 and negative correlations with exploratory behaviors, indicating a link between neuroinflammation and behavioral consequences. Unveiling a correlation between molecular and behavioral changes could reveal a biomarker indicative of these responses and could also result in a potential target for the treatment and prevention of cognitive changes following long space missions and/or muscle disuse on Earth.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9695374/
PMC6141014,Structural and functional properties of bone are compromised in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mice,Frank C. Ko; Jia Li; Daniel J. Brooks; Seward B. Rutkove; Mary L. Bouxsein,ALS mouse model; bone strength; bone biomechanics; fracture toughness; microCT,0,"In addition to muscle weakness, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is associated with an increased incidence of skeletal fractures. The SOD1 SOD1 This is the first study to demonstrate functional deficits in the skeleton of end-stage ALS mice, and imply multiple mechanisms for increased skeletal fragility and fracture risk in patients in ALS. Importantly, our results provide strong rationale for interventions to reduce fracture risk in ALS patients with advanced disease.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6141014/
PMC6706399,Longitudinal time course of muscle impairments during partial weight-bearing in rats,Marie Mortreux; Frank C. Ko; Daniela Riveros; Mary L. Bouxsein; Seward B. Rutkove,Experimental models of disease; Physiology,42,"In the near future, space agencies plan to send the first crews for extended stays on the Moon and Mars, where gravity is significantly reduced compared to Earth (0.16×",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6706399/
PMC12034070,Blood Flow Restriction Training: A Tool to Enhance Rehabilitation and Build Athlete Resiliency,Mark Murphy,N/A,88,"Blood flow restriction training (BFRT) is a tool utilized in rehabilitation and injury prevention to improve muscle strength and size, particularly in load-compromised individuals. BFRT facilitates gains in muscular strength and hypertrophy at lower loads, allowing for accelerated recovery and less disuse atrophy. BFRT must be applied appropriately and with caution, particularly in individuals with cardiovascular concerns. There are applications for BFRT across a wide spectrum of human performance training and in rehabilitation of both lower and upper extremity conditions, providing a high-quality adjunct to improve muscle strength, power, and endurance. Level V, expert opinion.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12034070/
PMC7235020,Dose-dependent skeletal deficits due to varied reductions in mechanical loading in rats,Frank C. Ko; Marie Mortreux; Daniela Riveros; Janice A. Nagy; Seward B. Rutkove; Mary L. Bouxsein,Experimental models of disease; Preclinical research,47,"Reduced skeletal loading leads to marked bone loss. Animal models of hindlimb suspension are widely used to assess alterations in skeleton during the course of complete unloading. More recently, the effects of partial unloading on the musculoskeletal system have been interrogated in mice and rats, revealing dose-dependent effects of partial weight bearing (PWB) on the skeleton and skeletal muscle. Here, we extended these studies to determine the structural and functional skeletal alterations in 14-week-old male Wister rats exposed to 20%, 40%, 70%, or 100% of body weight for 1, 2, or 4 weeks (",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7235020/
PMC7599661,Approaching Gravity as a Continuum Using the Rat Partial Weight-Bearing Model,Marie Mortreux; Megan E. Rosa-Caldwell,gravity; partial weight-bearing; ground-based; rodent; spaceflight; analog,192,"For decades, scientists have relied on animals to understand the risks and consequences of space travel. Animals remain key to study the physiological alterations during spaceflight and provide crucial information about microgravity-induced changes. While spaceflights may appear common, they remain costly and, coupled with limited cargo areas, do not allow for large sample sizes onboard. In 1979, a model of hindlimb unloading (HU) was successfully created to mimic microgravity and has been used extensively since its creation. Four decades later, the first model of mouse partial weight-bearing (PWB) was developed, aiming at mimicking partial gravity environments. Return to the Lunar surface for astronauts is now imminent and prompted the need for an animal model closer to human physiology; hence in 2018, our laboratory created a new model of PWB for adult rats. In this review, we will focus on the rat model of PWB, from its conception to the current state of knowledge. Additionally, we will address how this new model, used in conjunction with HU, will help implement new paradigms allowing scientists to anticipate the physiological alterations and needs of astronauts. Finally, we will discuss the outstanding questions and future perspectives in space research and propose potential solutions using the rat PWB model.",2020,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7599661/
PMC8493566,Hindlimb suspension in Wistar rats: Sex‐based differences in muscle response,Marie Mortreux; Megan E. Rosa‐Caldwell; Ian D. Stiehl; Dong‐Min Sung; Nicholas T. Thomas; Christopher S. Fry; Seward B. Rutkove,ground‐based; microgravity; muscle; sex‐based; spaceflight,75,"Ground‐based animal models have been used extensively to understand the effects of microgravity on various physiological systems. Among them, hindlimb suspension (HLS), developed in 1979 in rats, remains the gold‐standard and allows researchers to study the consequences of total unloading of the hind limbs while inducing a cephalic fluid shift. While this model has already brought valuable insights to space biology, few studies have directly compared functional decrements in the muscles of males and females during HLS. We exposed 28 adult Wistar rats (14 males and 14 females) to 14 days of HLS or normal loading (NL) to better assess how sex impacts disuse‐induced muscle deconditioning. Females better maintained muscle function during HLS than males, as shown by a more moderate reduction in grip strength at 7 days (males: −37.5 ± 3.1%, females: −22.4 ± 6.5%, compared to baseline), that remains stable during the second week of unloading (males: −53.3 ± 5.7%, females: −22.4 ± 5.5%, compared to day 0) while the males exhibit a steady decrease over time (effect of sex × loading",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8493566/
PMC10926278,Correction to “Adaptation to full weight‐bearing following disuse in rats: The impact of biological sex on musculoskeletal recovery”,N/A,N/A,0,N/A,2024,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10926278/
PMC6069985,Effects of liquid cultivation on gene expression and phenotype of ,İrem Çelen; Jung H. Doh; Chandran R. Sabanayagam,Dormant genes; ncRNA; Adaptation; Reaction norm,62,"Liquid cultures have been commonly used in space, toxicology, and pharmacology studies of Significant variations were found in the gene expressions between the N2 and AB1 strains in response to liquid cultivation. The results demonstrated that 8–34% of the environmental change-induced transcriptional responses are transmitted to the subsequent generation. By categorizing the gene expressions for genotype, environment, and genotype-environment interactions, we identified that the genotype has a substantial impact on the adaptive responses. Functional analysis of the transcriptome showed correlation with phenotypical changes. For example, the N2 strain exhibited alterations in both phenotype and gene expressions for germline and cuticle in axenic liquid cultivation. We found transcript evidence to approximately 21% of the computationally predicted genes in The presented study reveals substantial differences between N2 and AB1 strains for transcriptomic and phenotypical responses to rapid environmental changes. Our data can provide standard controls for future studies for the liquid cultivation of The online version of this article (10.1186/s12864-018-4948-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6069985/
PMC9856674,Transcriptomic Signature of the Simulated Microgravity Response in ,İrem Çelen; Aroshan Jayasinghe; Jung H. Doh; Chandran R. Sabanayagam,ceramide; sphinogolipid signaling; longevity; transcriptome; space; intergenerational; microgravity,77,"Given the growing interest in human exploration of space, it is crucial to identify the effects of space conditions on biological processes. Here, we analyze the transcriptomic response of",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9856674/
PMC9410522,Enabling Clonal Analyses of Yeast in Outer Space by Encapsulation and Desiccation in Hollow Microparticles,Simon Ng; Cayden Williamson; Mark van Zee; Dino Di Carlo; Sergio R. Santa Maria,single-cell analysis; space biology; microfluidics; cell encapsulation; microbes; preservation; hydrogel,31,"Studying microbes at the single-cell level in space can accelerate human space exploration both via the development of novel biotechnologies and via the understanding of cellular responses to space stressors and countermeasures. High-throughput technologies for screening natural and engineered cell populations can reveal cellular heterogeneity and identify high-performance cells. Here, we present a method to desiccate and preserve microbes in nanoliter-scale compartments, termed PicoShells, which are microparticles with a hollow inner cavity. In PicoShells, single cells are confined in an inner aqueous core by a porous hydrogel shell, allowing the diffusion of nutrients, wastes, and assay reagents for uninhibited cell growth and flexible assay protocols. Desiccated PicoShells offer analysis capabilities for single-cell derived colonies with a simple, low resource workflow, requiring only the addition of water to rehydrate hundreds of thousands of PicoShells and the single microbes encapsulated inside. Our desiccation method results in the recovery of desiccated microparticle morphology and porosity after a multi-week storage period and rehydration, with particle diameter and porosity metrics changing by less than 18% and 7%, respectively, compared to fresh microparticles. We also recorded the high viability of",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9410522/
PMC10344948,,Amanda Scott; Craig R.G. Willis; Masafumi Muratani; Atsushi Higashitani; Timothy Etheridge; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Colleen S. Deane,Omics; Model organism; Space sciences,82,The application of omics to study,2023,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10344948/
PMC4750446,Dried plum diet protects from bone loss caused by ionizing radiation,A.-S. Schreurs; Y. Shirazi-Fard; M. Shahnazari; J. S. Alwood; T. A. Truong; C. G. T. Tahimic; C. L. Limoli; N. D. Turner; B. Halloran; R. K. Globus,N/A,64,"Bone loss caused by ionizing radiation is a potential health concern for radiotherapy patients, radiation workers and astronauts. In animal studies, exposure to ionizing radiation increases oxidative damage in skeletal tissues, and results in an imbalance in bone remodeling initiated by increased bone-resorbing osteoclasts. Therefore, we evaluated various candidate interventions with antioxidant or anti-inflammatory activities (antioxidant cocktail, dihydrolipoic acid, ibuprofen, dried plum) both for their ability to blunt the expression of resorption-related genes in marrow cells after irradiation with either gamma rays (photons, 2 Gy) or simulated space radiation (protons and heavy ions, 1 Gy) and to prevent bone loss. Dried plum was most effective in reducing the expression of genes related to bone resorption (",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4750446/
PMC7162976,Dietary countermeasure mitigates simulated spaceflight-induced osteopenia in mice,Sonette Steczina; Candice G. T. Tahimic; Megan Pendleton; Ons M’Saad; Moniece Lowe; Joshua S. Alwood; Bernard P. Halloran; Ruth K. Globus; Ann-Sofie Schreurs,Pharmaceutics; Bone,78,"Spaceflight is a unique environment that includes at least two factors which can negatively impact skeletal health: microgravity and ionizing radiation. We have previously shown that a diet supplemented with dried plum powder (DP) prevented radiation-induced bone loss in mice. In this study, we investigated the capacity of the DP diet to prevent bone loss in mice following exposure to simulated spaceflight, combining microgravity (by hindlimb unloading) and radiation exposure. The DP diet was effective at preventing most decrements in bone micro-architectural and mechanical properties due to hindlimb unloading alone and simulated spaceflight. Furthermore, we show that the DP diet can protect osteoprogenitors from impairments resulting from simulated microgravity. Based on our findings, a dietary supplementation with DP could be an effective countermeasure against the skeletal deficits observed in astronauts during spaceflight.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7162976/
PMC11353732,Simulated Microgravity Alters Gene Regulation Linked to Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease,Candice G. T. Tahimic; Sonette Steczina; Aimy Sebastian; Nicholas R. Hum; Metadel Abegaz; Masahiro Terada; Maria Cimini; David A. Goukassian; Ann-Sofie Schreurs; Tana M. Hoban-Higgins; Charles A. Fuller; Gabriela G. Loots; Ruth K. Globus; Yasaman Shirazi-Fard,hindlimb unloading; microgravity; cardiovascular system; immune response; transcriptomics,64,"Microgravity exposure induces a cephalad fluid shift and an overall reduction in physical activity levels which can lead to cardiovascular deconditioning in the absence of countermeasures. Future spaceflight missions will expose crew to extended periods of microgravity among other stressors, the effects of which on cardiovascular health are not fully known. In this study, we determined cardiac responses to extended microgravity exposure using the rat hindlimb unloading (HU) model. We hypothesized that exposure to prolonged simulated microgravity and subsequent recovery would lead to increased oxidative damage and altered expression of genes involved in the oxidative response. To test this hypothesis, we examined hearts of male (three and nine months of age) and female (3 months of age) Long–Evans rats that underwent HU for various durations up to 90 days and reambulated up to 90 days post-HU. Results indicate sex-dependent changes in oxidative damage marker 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and antioxidant gene expression in left ventricular tissue. Three-month-old females displayed elevated 8-OHdG levels after 14 days of HU while age-matched males did not. In nine-month-old males, there were no differences in 8-OHdG levels between HU and normally loaded control males at any of the timepoints tested following HU. RNAseq analysis of left ventricular tissue from nine-month-old males after 14 days of HU revealed upregulation of pathways involved in pro-inflammatory signaling, immune cell activation and differential expression of genes associated with cardiovascular disease progression. Taken together, these findings provide a rationale for targeting antioxidant and immune pathways and that sex differences should be taken into account in the development of countermeasures to maintain cardiovascular health in space.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11353732/
PMC11953390,Identification of therapeutic targets for chronic kidney disease through Mendelian randomization analysis of druggable genes,Run-Sen Liang; Jin-Qi Su; Xiang-Qi Wu; Qi Wang; Yong-Mei Cai; Hong-Yong Su; Ji-Xin Tang; Cui-Wei Yao,Chronic kidney disease; TUBB; Druggable genes; Mendelian randomization analysis; Data mining; Drug discovery; Genetics; Nephrology,49,"Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) is a multifaceted and gradually advancing condition characterized by a complex pathogenesis. The current therapeutic options for CKD remain limited in efficacy. Consequently, the identification and exploration of novel drug targets for CKD are of paramount importance. We identified cis-expression quantitative trait loci (cis-eQTLs) with potential as drug targets from the eQTLGen Consortium database to serve as the exposure. For the outcome, we utilized a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of chronic kidney disease (CKD) from the FinnGen database, which comprised a case group of 11,265 individuals and a control group of 436,208 individuals. MR analysis was employed to investigate druggable genes closely associated with CKD. Subsequently, Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses were conducted to elucidate the functional roles of these significant genes. Finally, a colocalization analysis was conducted to determine the likelihood that a cis-eQTL for a druggable gene and CKD share a causal variant. The expression of 12 genes was found to be significantly associated with CKD risk, with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.05. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses indicated that these genes are primarily involved in the regulation of MAP kinase activity, regulation of protein serine/threonine kinase activity, Gap junction, Platelet activation and Oxytocin signaling pathway. The colocalization analysis results suggested that CKD and the TUBB gene may share a causal variant, with a posterior probability (PP.H4) exceeding 80% (TUBB: 97.27%). Compelling statistical evidence indicates that TUBB represents the most promising pharmacological target for the treatment of CKD. This study not only identifies potential therapeutic targets but also offers valuable insights for future drug development in the context of CKD. The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-94761-0.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11953390/
PMC9737020,A New Role of NAP1L1 in Megakaryocytes and Human Platelets,Martin Freitag; Hansjörg Schwertz,co-immunoprecipitation; DLAT; ODP2; PDC-E2; megakaryocytes; NAP1L1; overexpression; platelets; protein interactions; sepsis,98,"Platelets (PLTs) are anucleate and considered incapable of nuclear functions. Contrastingly, nuclear proteins were detected in human PLTs. For most of these proteins, it is unclear if nuclear or alternatively assigned functions are performed, a question we wanted to address for",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9737020/
PMC5515519,Evaluation of rodent spaceflight in the NASA animal enclosure module for an extended operational period (up to 35 days),Eric L Moyer; Paula M Dumars; Gwo-Shing Sun; Kara J Martin; David G Heathcote; Richard D Boyle; Mike G Skidmore,N/A,21,"The National Aeronautics and Space Administration Animal Enclosure Module (AEM) was developed as a self-contained rodent habitat for shuttle flight missions that provides inhabitants with living space, food, water, ventilation, and lighting, and this study reports whether, after minimal hardware modification, the AEM could support an extended term up to 35 days for Sprague-Dawley rats and C57BL/6 female mice for use on the International Space Station. Success was evaluated based on comparison of AEM housed animals to that of vivarium housed and to normal biological ranges through various measures of animal health and well-being, including animal health evaluations, animal growth and body masses, organ masses, rodent food bar consumption, water consumption, and analysis of blood contents. The results of this study confirmed that the AEMs could support 12 adult female C57BL/6 mice for up to 35 days with self-contained RFB and water, and the AEMs could also support 5 adult male Sprague-Dawley rats for 35 days with external replenishment of diet and water. This study has demonstrated the capability and flexibility of the AEM to operate for up to 35 days with minor hardware modification. Therefore, with modifications, it is possible to utilize this hardware on the International Space Station or other operational platforms to extend the space life science research use of mice and rats.",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5515519/
PMC10144393,Morphology of ,Megan Hupka; Raj Kedia; Rylee Schauer; Brooke Shepard; María Granados-Presa; Mark Vande Hei; Pamela Flores; Luis Zea,microgravity; fungal biofilm; International Space Station; microscopy; spacecraft,51,"Fungi biofilms have been found growing on spacecraft surfaces such as windows, piping, cables, etc. The contamination of these surfaces with fungi, although undesirable, is highly difficult to avoid. While several biofilm forming species, including",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10144393/
PMC10719374,Explainable machine learning identifies multi-omics signatures of muscle response to spaceflight in mice,Kevin Li; Riya Desai; Ryan T. Scott; Joel Ricky Steele; Meera Machado; Samuel Demharter; Adrienne Hoarfrost; Jessica L. Braun; Val A. Fajardo; Lauren M. Sanders; Sylvain V. Costes,Molecular biology; Mathematics and computing,38,"The adverse effects of microgravity exposure on mammalian physiology during spaceflight necessitate a deep understanding of the underlying mechanisms to develop effective countermeasures. One such concern is muscle atrophy, which is partly attributed to the dysregulation of calcium levels due to abnormalities in SERCA pump functioning. To identify potential biomarkers for this condition, multi-omics data and physiological data available on the NASA Open Science Data Repository (osdr.nasa.gov) were used, and machine learning methods were employed. Specifically, we used multi-omics (transcriptomic, proteomic, and DNA methylation) data and calcium reuptake data collected from C57BL/6 J mouse soleus and tibialis anterior tissues during several 30+ day-long missions on the international space station. The QLattice symbolic regression algorithm was introduced to generate highly explainable models that predict either experimental conditions or calcium reuptake levels based on multi-omics features. The list of candidate models established by QLattice was used to identify key features contributing to the predictive capability of these models, with Acyp1 and Rps7 proteins found to be the most predictive biomarkers related to the resilience of the tibialis anterior muscle in space. These findings could serve as targets for future interventions aiming to reduce the extent of muscle atrophy during space travel.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10719374/
PMC11096397,Microbial adaptation to spaceflight is correlated with bacteriophage-encoded functions,Iris Irby; Jared T. Broddrick,Phage biology; Bacteriophages; Microbial ecology,70,"Evidence from the International Space Station suggests microbial populations are rapidly adapting to the spacecraft environment; however, the mechanism of this adaptation is not understood. Bacteriophages are prolific mediators of bacterial adaptation on Earth. Here we survey 245 genomes sequenced from bacterial strains isolated on the International Space Station for dormant (lysogenic) bacteriophages. Our analysis indicates phage-associated genes are significantly different between spaceflight strains and their terrestrial counterparts. In addition, we identify 283 complete prophages, those that could initiate bacterial lysis and infect additional hosts, of which 21% are novel. These prophage regions encode functions that correlate with increased persistence in extreme environments, such as spaceflight, to include antimicrobial resistance and virulence, DNA damage repair, and dormancy. Our results correlate microbial adaptation in spaceflight to bacteriophage-encoded functions that may impact human health in spaceflight.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11096397/
PMC11166655,Influence of the spaceflight environment on macrophage lineages,Rocky An; Virginia Katherine Blackwell; Bijan Harandi; Alicia C. Gibbons; Olivia Siu; Iris Irby; Amy Rees; Nadjet Cornejal; Kristina M. Sattler; Tao Sheng; Nicholas C. Syracuse; David Loftus; Sergio R. Santa Maria; Egle Cekanaviciute; Sigrid S. Reinsch; Hami E. Ray; Amber M. Paul,Biomarkers; Immunology,100,"Spaceflight and terrestrial spaceflight analogs can alter immune phenotypes. Macrophages are important immune cells that bridge the innate and adaptive immune systems and participate in immunoregulatory processes of homeostasis. Furthermore, macrophages are critically involved in initiating immunity, defending against injury and infection, and are also involved in immune resolution and wound healing. Heterogeneous populations of macrophage-type cells reside in many tissues and cause a variety of tissue-specific effects through direct or indirect interactions with other physiological systems, including the nervous and endocrine systems. It is vital to understand how macrophages respond to the unique environment of space to safeguard crew members with appropriate countermeasures for future missions in low Earth orbit and beyond. This review highlights current literature on macrophage responses to spaceflight and spaceflight analogs.",2024,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166655/
PMC7937622,MARSBOx: Fungal and Bacterial Endurance From a Balloon-Flown Analog Mission in the Stratosphere,Marta Cortesão; Katharina Siems; Stella Koch; Kristina Beblo-Vranesevic; Elke Rabbow; Thomas Berger; Michael Lane; Leandro James; Prital Johnson; Samantha M. Waters; Sonali D. Verma; David J. Smith; Ralf Moeller,Mars simulation; fungal spores; spore survival; space; radiation; UV; balloon flight; stress resistance,108,"Whether terrestrial life can withstand the martian environment is of paramount interest for planetary protection measures and space exploration. To understand microbial survival potential in Mars-like conditions, several fungal and bacterial samples were launched in September 2019 on a large NASA scientific balloon flight to the middle stratosphere (∼38 km altitude) where radiation levels resembled values at the equatorial Mars surface. Fungal spores of",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7937622/
PMC7055474,,Blake W. Stamps; Caitlin L. Bojanowski; Carrie A. Drake; Heather S. Nunn; Pamela F. Lloyd; James G. Floyd; Katelyn A. Emmerich; Abby R. Neal; Wendy J. Crookes-Goodson; Bradley S. Stevenson,biocorrosion; biofouling; fuel; biodiesel; B20; biodegradation,72,"Renewable fuels hold great promise for the future yet their susceptibility to biodegradation and subsequent corrosion represents a challenge that needs to be directly assessed. Biodiesel is a renewable fuel that is widely used as a substitute or extender for petroleum diesel and is composed of a mixture of fatty acid methyl esters derived from plant or animal fats. Biodiesel can be blended up to 20% v/v with ultra-low sulfur diesel (i.e., B20) and used interchangeably with diesel engines and infrastructure. The addition of biodiesel, however, has been linked to increased susceptibility to biodegradation. Microorganisms proliferating via degradation of biodiesel blends have been linked to microbiologically influenced corrosion in the laboratory, but not measured directly in storage tanks (i.e.,",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7055474/
PMC7118179,"Identification of Metagenome-Assembled Genomes Containing Antimicrobial Resistance Genes, Isolated from an Advanced Water Treatment Facility",Blake W. Stamps; John R. Spear,N/A,13,"Here, we present 95 metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) that harbor antimicrobial resistance genes, isolated from samples obtained in a large advanced wastewater reclamation facility prior to microfiltration. The MAGs were not in abundance after filtration at the facility and represent a useful resource to the water treatment community at large.",2020,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7118179/
PMC4494396,Nature of Pre-Earthquake Phenomena and their Effects on Living Organisms,Friedemann Freund; Viktor Stolc,pre-earthquake phenomena; positive holes; ULF (ultralow frequency) waves; ELF (extremely low frequency) waves; air ionization; water oxidation; hydrogen peroxide; physiological effects,76,"Earthquakes are invariably preceded by a period when stresses increase deep in the Earth. Animals appear to be able to sense impending seismic events. During build-up of stress, electronic charge carriers are activated deep below, called positive holes. Positive holes have unusual properties: they can travel fast and far into and through the surrounding rocks. As they flow, they generate ultralow frequency electromagnetic waves. When they arrive at the Earth surface, they can ionize the air. When they flow into water, they oxidize it to hydrogen peroxides. All these physical and chemical processes can have noticeable effects on animals. Earthquakes occur when tectonic stresses build up deep in the Earth before catastrophic rupture. During the build-up of stress, processes that occur in the crustal rocks lead to the activation of highly mobile electronic charge carriers. These charge carriers are able to flow out of the stressed rock volume into surrounding rocks. Such outflow constitutes an electric current, which generates electromagnetic (EM) signals. If the outflow occurs in bursts, it will lead to short EM pulses. If the outflow is continuous, the currents may fluctuate, generating EM emissions over a wide frequency range. Only ultralow and extremely low frequency (ULF/ELF) waves travel through rock and can reach the Earth surface. The outflowing charge carriers are (i) positively charged and (ii) highly oxidizing. When they arrive at the Earth surface from below, they build up microscopic electric fields, strong enough to field-ionize air molecules. As a result, the air above the epicentral region of an impending major earthquake often becomes laden with positive airborne ions. Medical research has long shown that positive airborne ions cause changes in stress hormone levels in animals and humans. In addition to the ULF/ELF emissions, positive airborne ions can cause unusual reactions among animals. When the charge carriers flow into water, they oxidize water to hydrogen peroxide. This, plus oxidation of organic compounds, can cause behavioral changes among aquatic animals.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4494396/
PMC8323809,The rapid diagnosis and effective inhibition of coronavirus using spike antibody attached gold nanoparticles,Avijit Pramanik; Ye Gao; Shamily Patibandla; Dipanwita Mitra; Martin G. McCandless; Lauren A. Fassero; Kalein Gates; Ritesh Tandon; Paresh Chandra Ray,N/A,44,"Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the cause of the coronavirus disease that began in 2019 (COVID-19), has been responsible for 1.4 million deaths worldwide as of 13 November 2020. Because at the time of writing no vaccine is yet available, a rapid diagnostic assay is very urgently needed. Herein, we present the development of anti-spike antibody attached gold nanoparticles for the rapid diagnosis of specific COVID-19 viral antigen or virus",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8323809/
PMC8886715,"Blocking SARS-CoV-2 Delta Variant (B.1.617.2)
Spike Protein Receptor-Binding Domain Binding with the ACE2 Receptor
of the Host Cell and Inhibiting Virus Infections Using Human Host
Defense Peptide-Conjugated Graphene Quantum Dots",Avijit Pramanik; Poonam C. Sharma; Shamily Patibandla; Ye Gao; Vinod Ruppa-Kasani; Jagruti Goli; Animesh Kumar; Abhirup Chatterjee; Sudarson Sekhar Sinha; John T. Bates; Michael A. Bierdeman; Ritesh Tandon; Paresh Chandra Ray,N/A,27,"The emergence of double mutation delta (B.1.617.2) variants has dropped vaccine effectiveness against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Although COVID-19 is responsible for more than 5.4 M deaths till now, more than 40% of infected individuals are asymptomatic carriers as the immune system of the human body can control the SARS-CoV-2 infection. Herein, we report for the first time that human host defense neutrophil α-defensin HNP1 and human cathelicidin LL-37 peptide-conjugated graphene quantum dots (GQDs) have the capability to prevent the delta variant virus entry into the host cells via blocking SARS-CoV-2 delta variant (B.1.617.2) spike protein receptor-binding domain (RBD) binding with host cells’ angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Experimental data shows that due to the binding between the delta variant spike protein RBD and bioconjugate GQDs, in the presence of the delta variant spike protein, the fluorescence signal from GQDs quenched abruptly. Experimental quenching data shows a nonlinear Stern–Volmer quenching profile, which indicates multiple binding sites. Using the modified Hill equation, we have determined",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8886715/
PMC8890767,Safety and Pharmacokinetics of Intranasally Administered Heparin,Hannah M. Harris; Katherine L. Boyet; Hao Liu; Rohini Dwivedi; Nicole M. Ashpole; Ritesh Tandon; Gene L. Bidwell; Zhi Cheng; Lauren A. Fassero; Christian S. Yu; Vitor H. Pomin; Dipanwita Mitra; Kerri A. Harrison; Eric Dahl; Bill J. Gurley; Arun Kumar Kotha; Mahavir Bhupal Chougule; Joshua S. Sharp,Covid-19; heparin; intranasal delivery; SARS-CoV-2,30,"Intranasally administered unfractionated heparin (UFH) and other sulfated polysaccharides are potential prophylactics for COVID-19. The purpose of this research was to measure the safety and pharmacokinetics of clearance of intranasally administered UFH solution from the nasal cavity. Double-blinded daily intranasal dosing in C57Bl6 mice with four doses (60 ng to 60 μg) of UFH was carried out for fourteen consecutive days, with both blood coagulation measurements and subject adverse event monitoring. The pharmacokinetics of fluorescent-labeled UFH clearance from the nasal cavity were measured in mice by UFH showed no evidence of toxicity in mice at any dose measured. No significant changes were observed in activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), platelet count, or frequency of minor irritant events over vehicle-only control. Human subjects showed no significant changes in aPTT time, international normalized ratio (INR), or platelet count over baseline measurements. No serious adverse events were observed. UFH showed no toxic effects for extended daily intranasal dosing in mice as well as humans. The clearance kinetics of intranasal heparin solution from the nasal cavity indicates potentially protective levels for up to 12 h after dosing. The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s11095-022-03191-4.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8890767/
PMC9487896,Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 wild-type (Wuhan-Hu-1) and Delta (B.1.617.2) strains by marine sulfated glycans,Rohini Dwivedi; Poonam Sharma; Marwa Farrag; Seon Beom Kim; Lauren A Fassero; Ritesh Tandon; Vitor H Pomin,fucosylated chondroitin sulfate; nuclear magnetic resonance; SARS-CoV-2; sulfated fucan; viral inhibition,26,"The Coronavirus disease pandemic has steered the global therapeutic research efforts toward the discovery of potential anti-severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) molecules. The role of the viral spike glycoprotein (S-protein) has been clearly established in SARS-CoV-2 infection through its capacity to bind to the host cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) and angiotensin-converting enzyme-2. The antiviral strategies targeting these 2 virus receptors are currently under intense investigation. However, the rapid evolution of the SARS-CoV-2 genome has resulted in numerous mutations in the S-protein posing a significant challenge for the design of S-protein-targeted inhibitors. As an example, the 2 key mutations in the S-protein receptor-binding domain (RBD), L452R, and T478K in the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant (B.1.617.2) confer tighter binding to the host epithelial cells. Marine sulfated glycans (MSGs) demonstrate excellent inhibitory activity against SARS-CoV-2 via competitive disruption of the S-protein RBD-HSPG interactions and thus have the potential to be developed into effective prophylactic and therapeutic molecules. In this study, 7 different MSGs were evaluated for their anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity in a virus entry assay utilizing a SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus coated with S-protein of the wild-type (Wuhan-Hu-1) or the Delta (B.1.617.2) strain. Although all tested MSGs showed strong inhibitory activity against both strains, no correlations between MSG structural features and virus inhibition could be drawn. Nevertheless, the current study provides evidence for the maintenance of inhibitory activity of MSGs against evolving SARS-CoV-2 strains.",2022,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9487896/
PMC10142442,Inhibition of Cytomegalovirus by ,Poonam Sharma; Rohini Dwivedi; Priya Ray; Jayanti Shukla; Vitor H. Pomin; Ritesh Tandon,herpesviruses; marine sulfated glycans; virus entry,45,"Many viruses attach to host cells by first interacting with cell surface proteoglycans containing heparan sulfate (HS) glycosaminoglycan chains and then by engaging with specific receptor, resulting in virus entry. In this project, HS–virus interactions were targeted by a new fucosylated chondroitin sulfate from the sea cucumber",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10142442/
PMC11477029,Effect of Simulated Cosmic Radiation on Cytomegalovirus Reactivation and Lytic Replication,Satish K. Mehta; Douglass M. Diak; Sara Bustos-Lopez; Mayra Nelman-Gonzalez; Xi Chen; Ianik Plante; Stephen J. Stray; Ritesh Tandon; Brian E. Crucian,cytomegalovirus; radiation; galactic cosmic radiation; spaceflight; herpes viral reactivation,23,"Human exploration of the solar system will expose crew members to galactic cosmic radiation (GCR), with a potential for adverse health effects. GCR particles (protons and ions) move at nearly the speed of light and easily penetrate space station walls, as well as the human body. Previously, we have shown reactivation of latent herpesviruses, including herpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster virus, Epstein–Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus (CMV), during stays at the International Space Station. Given the prevalence of latent CMV and the known propensity of space radiation to cause alterations in many cellular processes, we undertook this study to understand the role of GCR in reactivating latent CMV. Latently infected Kasumi cells with CMV were irradiated with",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11477029/
PMC4309301,A Tissue Retrieval and Postharvest Processing Regimen for Rodent Reproductive Tissues Compatible with Long-Term Storage on the International Space Station and Postflight Biospecimen Sharing Program,Vijayalaxmi Gupta; Lesya Holets-Bondar; Katherine F. Roby; George Enders; Joseph S. Tash,N/A,16,"Collection and processing of tissues to preserve space flight effects from animals after return to Earth is challenging. Specimens must be harvested with minimal time after landing to minimize postflight readaptation alterations in protein expression/translation, posttranslational modifications, and expression, as well as changes in gene expression and tissue histological degradation after euthanasia. We report the development of a widely applicable strategy for determining the window of optimal species-specific and tissue-specific posteuthanasia harvest that can be utilized to integrate into multi-investigator Biospecimen Sharing Programs. We also determined methods for ISS-compatible long-term tissue storage (10 months at −80°C) that yield recovery of high quality mRNA and protein for western analysis after sample return. Our focus was reproductive tissues. The time following euthanasia where tissues could be collected and histological integrity was maintained varied with tissue and species ranging between 1 and 3 hours. RNA quality was preserved in key reproductive tissues fixed in RNA",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4309301/
PMC11166981,Spaceflight induces changes in gene expression profiles linked to insulin and estrogen,Begum Aydogan Mathyk; Marshall Tabetah; Rashid Karim; Victoria Zaksas; JangKeun Kim; R. I. Anu; Masafumi Muratani; Alexia Tasoula; Ruth Subhash Singh; Yen-Kai Chen; Eliah Overbey; Jiwoon Park; Henry Cope; Hossein Fazelinia; Davide Povero; Joseph Borg; Remi V. Klotz; Min Yu; Steven L. Young; Christopher E. Mason; Nathaniel Szewczyk; Riley M. St Clair; Fathi Karouia; Afshin Beheshti,Systems biology; Computational biology and bioinformatics,95,"Organismal adaptations to spaceflight have been characterized at the molecular level in model organisms, including",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166981/
PMC6343501,The multiscale structural and mechanical effects of mouse supraspinatus muscle unloading on the mature enthesis,Alix C. Deymier; Andrea G. Schwartz; Zhounghou Cai; Tyrone L. Daulton; Jill D. Pasteris; Guy M. Genin; Stavros Thomopoulos,Enthesis; Biomechanics; Paralysis; Unloading; Structure; Shoulder; Rotator Cuff,0,"The musculoskeletal system is sensitive to its loading environment; this is of particular concern under conditions such as disuse, paralysis, and extended-duration space flight. Although structural and mechanical changes to tendon and bone following paralysis and disuse are well understood, there is a pressing need to understand how this unloading affects the bone-tendon interface (enthesis); the location most prone to tears and injury. We therefore elucidated these effects of unloading in the entheses of adult mice shoulders that were paralyzed for 21 days by treatment with botulinum toxin A. Unloading significantly increased the extent of mechanical failure and was associated with structural changes across hierarchical scales. At the millimeter scale, unloading caused bone loss. At the micrometer scale, unloading decreased bioapatite crystal size and crystallographic alignment in the enthesis. At the nanometer scale, unloading induced compositional changes that stiffened the bioapatite/collagen composite tissue. Mathematical modeling and mechanical testing indicated that these factors combined to increase local elevations of stress while decreasing the ability of the tissue to absorb energy prior to failure, thereby increasing injury risk. These first observations of the multiscale effects of unloading on the adult enthesis provide new insight into the hierarchical features of structure and composition that endow the enthesis with increased resistance to failure.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6343501/
PMC7138367,Multiscale effects of spaceflight on murine tendon and bone,Alix C. Deymier; Andrea G. Schwartz; Chanteak Lim; Brian Wingender; Akhilesh Kotiya; Hua Shen; Matthew J. Silva; Stavros Thomopoulos,enthesis; spaceflight; composition; structure; mechanics,0,"Despite a wealth of data on the effects of spaceflight on tendons and bones, little is known about its effects on the interfacial tissue between these two structures, the enthesis. Mice were sent to space on three separate missions: STS-131, STS-135, and Bion-M1 to determine how spaceflight affects the composition, structure, mechanics, and gene expression of the humerus-supraspinatus and calcaneus-Achilles entheses. At the nanoscale, spaceflight resulted in decreased carbonate levels in the bone, likely due to increased remodeling, as suggested by increased expression of genes related to osteoclastogenesis (",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7138367/
PMC6689164,Reproducible changes in the gut microbiome suggest a shift in microbial and host metabolism during spaceflight,Peng Jiang; Stefan J. Green; George E. Chlipala; Fred W. Turek; Martha Hotz Vitaterna,Space environment; Microgravity; Cosmic radiation; 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing; RNA-seq,59,"Space environment imposes a range of challenges to mammalian physiology and the gut microbiota, and interactions between the two are thought to be important in mammalian health in space. While previous findings have demonstrated a change in the gut microbial community structure during spaceflight, specific environmental factors that alter the gut microbiome and the functional relevance of the microbiome changes during spaceflight remain elusive. We profiled the microbiome using 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing in fecal samples collected from mice after a 37-day spaceflight onboard the International Space Station. We developed an analytical tool, named STARMAPs (Similarity Test for Accordant and Reproducible Microbiome Abundance Patterns), to compare microbiome changes reported here to other relevant datasets. We also integrated the gut microbiome data with the publically available transcriptomic data in the liver of the same animals for a systems-level analysis. We report an elevated microbiome alpha diversity and an altered microbial community structure that were associated with spaceflight environment. Using STARMAPs, we found the observed microbiome changes shared similarity with data reported in mice flown in a previous space shuttle mission, suggesting reproducibility of the effects of spaceflight on the gut microbiome. However, such changes were not comparable with those induced by space-type radiation in Earth-based studies. We found spaceflight led to significantly altered taxon abundance in one order, one family, five genera, and six species of microbes. This was accompanied by a change in the inferred microbial gene abundance that suggests an altered capacity in energy metabolism. Finally, we identified host genes whose expression in the liver were concordantly altered with the inferred gut microbial gene content, particularly highlighting a relationship between host genes involved in protein metabolism and microbial genes involved in putrescine degradation. These observations shed light on the specific environmental factors that contributed to a robust effect on the gut microbiome during spaceflight with important implications for mammalian metabolism. Our findings represent a key step toward a better understanding the role of the gut microbiome in mammalian health during spaceflight and provide a basis for future efforts to develop microbiota-based countermeasures that mitigate risks to crew health during long-term human space expeditions. The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-019-0724-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6689164/
PMC3564669,Failure to Generate Bone Marrow Adipocytes Does Not Protect Mice from Ovariectomy-Induced Osteopenia,Urszula T. Iwaniec; Russell T. Turner,osteoblast; osteoclast; menopause; osteoporosis; adipokines,0,"A reciprocal association between bone marrow fat and bone mass has been reported in ovariectomized rodents, suggesting that bone marrow adipogenesis has a negative effect on bone growth and turnover balance. Mice with loss of function mutations in kit receptor (",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3564669/
PMC4042434,Acute Exposure to High Dose γ-Radiation Results in Transient Activation of Bone Lining Cells,Russell T. Turner; Urszula T. Iwaniec; Carmen P. Wong; Laurence B. Lindenmaier; Lindsay A. Wagner; Adam J. Branscum; Scott A. Menn; James Taylor; Ye Zhang; Honglu Wu; Jean D. Sibonga,murine; bone histomorphometry; osteoblasts; osteoclasts; osteoporosis; bone marrow,0,"The present studies investigated the cellular mechanisms for the detrimental effects of high dose whole body γ-irradiation on bone. In addition, radioadaptation and bone marrow transplantation were assessed as interventions to mitigate the skeletal complications of irradiation. Increased trabecular thickness and separation and reduced fractional cancellous bone volume, connectivity density, and trabecular number were detected in proximal tibia and lumbar vertebra 14 days following γ-irradiation with 6 Gy. To establish the cellular mechanism for the architectural changes, vertebrae were analyzed by histomorphometry 1, 3, and 14 days following irradiation. Marrow cell density decreased within 1 day (67% reduction, p<0.0001), reached a minimum value after 3 days (86% reduction, p<0.0001), and partially rebounded by 14 days (30% reduction, p=0.0025) following irradiation. In contrast, osteoblast-lined bone perimeter was increased by 290% (1 day, p=0.04), 1230% (3 days, p<0.0001), and 530% (14 days, p=0.003), respectively. There was a strong association between radiation-induced marrow cell death and activation of bone lining cells to express the osteoblast phenotype (Pearson correlation −0.85, p<0.0001). An increase (p=0.004) in osteoclast-lined bone perimeter was also detected with irradiation. A priming dose of γ-radiation (0.5 mGy), previously shown to reduce mortality, had minimal effect on the cellular responses to radiation and did not prevent detrimental changes in bone architecture. Bone marrow transplantation normalized marrow cell density, bone turnover, and most indices of bone architecture following irradiation. In summary, radiation-induced death of marrow cells is associated with 1) a transient increase in bone formation due, at least in part, to activation of bone lining cells, and 2) an increase in bone resorption due to increased osteoclast perimeter. Bone marrow transplantation is effective in mitigating the detrimental effects of acute exposure to high dose whole body γ-radiation on bone turnover.",2013,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4042434/
PMC4161659,Morbid Obesity Attenuates the Skeletal Abnormalities Associated with Leptin Deficiency in Mice,Russell T. Turner; Kenneth A. Philbrick; Carmen P. Wong; Dawn A. Olson; Adam J. Branscum; Urszula T. Iwaniec,obesity; histomorphometry; microcomputed tomography; dual energy absorptiometry,0,Leptin-deficient,2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4161659/
PMC4917201,Hypothalamic Leptin Gene Therapy Reduces Body Weight without Accelerating Age-Related Bone Loss,Russell T. Turner; Michael Dube; Adam J. Branscum; Carmen P. Wong; Dawn A. Olson; Xiaoying Zhong; Mercedes F. Kweh; Iske V. Larkin; Thomas J. Wronski; Clifford J. Rosen; Satya P. Kalra; Urszula T. Iwaniec,rAAV-Leptin; microcomputed tomography; dual energy absorptiometry; white adipose tissue,0,"Excessive weight gain in adults is associated with a variety of negative health outcomes. Unfortunately, dieting, exercise, and pharmacological interventions have had limited long-term success in weight control and can result in detrimental side effects, including accelerating age-related cancellous bone loss. We investigated the efficacy of using hypothalamic leptin gene therapy as an alternative method for reducing weight in skeletally-mature (9-month-old) female rats and determined the impact of leptin-induced weight loss on bone mass, density, and microarchitecture, and serum biomarkers of bone turnover (CTx and osteocalcin). Rats were implanted with cannulae in the 3rd ventricle of the hypothalamus and injected with either recombinant adeno-associated virus encoding the gene for rat leptin (rAAV-Leptin, n=7) or a control vector encoding green fluorescent protein (rAAV-GFP, n=10) and sacrificed 18 weeks later. A baseline control group (n=7) was sacrificed at vector administration. rAAV-Leptin-treated rats lost weight (−4±2%) while rAAV-GFP-treated rats gained weight (14±2%) during the study. At study termination, rAAV-Leptin-treated rats weighed 17% less than rAAV-GFP-treated rats and had lower abdominal white adipose tissue weight (−80%), serum leptin (−77%), and serum IGF1 (−34%). Cancellous bone volume fraction in distal femur metaphysis and epiphysis, and in lumbar vertebra tended to be lower (p<0.1) in rAAV-GFP-treated rats (13.5-months-old) compared to baseline control rats (9-months-old). Significant differences in cancellous bone or biomarkers of bone turnover were not detected between rAAV-Leptin and rAAV-GFP rats. In summary, rAAV-Leptin-treated rats maintained a lower body weight compared to baseline and rAAV-GFP-treated rats with minimal effects on bone mass, density, microarchitecture, or biochemical markers of bone turnover.",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4917201/
PMC4985531,Hypothalamic Leptin Gene Therapy Reduces Bone Marrow Adiposity in ,Laurence B. Lindenmaier; Kenneth A. Philbrick; Adam J. Branscum; Satya P. Kalra; Russell T. Turner; Urszula T. Iwaniec,adipocyte; osteoblast; osteoclast; stem cell; osteoporosis; histomorphometry; rAAV,53,"Low bone mass is often associated with elevated bone marrow adiposity. Since osteoblasts and adipocytes are derived from the same mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) progenitor, adipocyte formation may increase at the expense of osteoblast formation. Leptin is an adipocyte-derived hormone known to regulate energy and bone metabolism. Leptin deficiency and high-fat diet-induced obesity are associated with increased marrow adipose tissue (MAT) and reduced bone formation. Short-duration studies suggest that leptin treatment reduces MAT and increases bone formation in leptin-deficient",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4985531/
PMC5421618,Room Temperature Housing Results in Premature Cancellous Bone Loss in Growing Female Mice: Implications for the Mouse as a Preclinical Model for Age-Related Bone Loss,Urszula T. Iwaniec; Kenneth A. Philbrick; Carmen P. Wong; Jody L. Gordon; Arianna M. Kahler-Quesada; Dawn A. Olson; Adam J. Branscum; Jennifer L. Sargent; Victoria E. DeMambro; Clifford J. Rosen; Russell T. Turner,animal models; osteoporosis; thermogenesis; sympathetic signaling,0,"Female mice are often used as preclinical models for osteoporosis but, in contrast to humans, mice exhibit cancellous bone loss during growth. Mice are routinely housed at room temperature (18–23°C), a strategy that exaggerates physiological differences in thermoregulation between mice (obligatory daily heterotherms) and humans (homeotherms). The purpose of this investigation was to assess whether housing female mice at thermoneutral (temperature range where the basal rate of energy production is at equilibrium with heat loss) alters bone growth, turnover and microarchitecture. Growing (4-week-old) female C57BL/6J and C3H/HeJ mice were housed at either 22 °C or 32°C for up to 18 weeks. C57BL/6J mice housed at 22°C experienced a 62% cancellous bone loss from the distal femur metaphysis during the interval from 8–18 weeks of age and lesser bone loss from the distal femur epiphysis, whereas cancellous and cortical bone mass in 32°C-housed mice were unchanged or increased. The impact of thermoneutral housing on cancellous bone was not limited to C57BL/6J mice as C3H/HeJ mice exhibited a similar skeletal response. The beneficial effects of thermoneutral housing on cancellous bone were associated with decreased Housing female mice at 22°C resulted in premature cancellous bone loss. Failure to account for species differences in thermoregulation may seriously confound interpretation of studies utilizing mice as preclinical models for osteoporosis.",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5421618/
PMC5515514,Spaceflight-induced vertebral bone loss in ovariectomized rats is associated with increased bone marrow adiposity and no change in bone formation,Jessica A Keune; Kenneth A Philbrick; Adam J Branscum; Urszula T Iwaniec; Russell T Turner,N/A,31,"There is often a reciprocal relationship between bone marrow adipocytes and osteoblasts, suggesting that marrow adipose tissue (MAT) antagonizes osteoblast differentiation. MAT is increased in rodents during spaceflight but a causal relationship between MAT and bone loss remains unclear. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of a 14-day spaceflight on bone mass, bone resorption, bone formation, and MAT in lumbar vertebrae of ovariectomized (OVX) rats. Twelve-week-old OVX Fischer 344 rats were randomly assigned to a ground control or flight group. Following flight, histological sections of the second lumbar vertebrae (",2016,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5515514/
PMC8671758,The Role of Estrogen Receptor α in Response to Longitudinal Bone Growth in ob/ob Mice,Lin-Yu Jin; Chen Guo; Shuai Xu; Hai-Ying Liu; Xin-Feng Li,estrogen receptor; leptin; skeletal longitudinal growth; growth plate; endochondral bone formation,40,"The absence of leptin results in contrasting growth pattern of appendicular and axial bone growth in ob/ob mice. Endochondral bone formation is an important procedure of growth plate determining the bone growth, where this procedure is also regulated by estrogen and its receptor (ER) signaling pathway. The present study is undertaken to explore the roles of ERs in regulating the different growth patterns in ob/ob mice. In this study, C57BL/6 female mice were used as wild-type (WT) mice; ob/ob mice and WT mice were age-matched fed, and bone length is analyzed by X-ray plain film at the 12 weeks old. We confirm that ob/ob mice have shorter femoral length and longer spine length than WT mice (",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8671758/
PMC5771473,Effects of hypothalamic leptin gene therapy on osteopetrosis in leptin-deficient mice,Kenneth A. Philbrick; Stephen A. Martin; Amy R. Colagiovanni; Adam J. Branscum; Russell T. Turner; Urszula T. Iwaniec,bone formation and resorption; cartilage; histology; ob/ob; osteoclast,0,"Impaired resorption of cartilage matrix deposited during endochondral ossification is a defining feature of juvenile osteopetrosis. Growing, leptin-deficient",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5771473/
PMC5288125,Leptin Stimulates Bone Formation in ,Kenneth A. Philbrick; Carmen P. Wong; Adam J. Branscum; Russell T. Turner; Urszula T. Iwaniec,animal model; bone formation; osteoblasts; neuroendocrine; bone histomorphometry,0,"Leptin, the protein product of the ob gene, is essential for normal bone growth, maturation, and turnover. Peripheral actions of leptin occur at lower serum levels of the hormone than central actions because entry of leptin into the central nervous system (CNS) is limited due to its saturable transport across the blood brain barrier (BBB). We performed a study in mice to model the impact of leptin production associated with different levels of adiposity on bone formation and compared the response with well-established centrally-mediated actions of the hormone on energy metabolism. Leptin was infused (0, 4, 12, 40, 140, or 400 ng/h) for 12 days into 6-week-old female",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5288125/
PMC5389344,Bone Marrow Adipose Tissue Deficiency Increases Disuse-Induced Bone Loss in Male Mice,Jessica A. Keune; Carmen P. Wong; Adam J. Branscum; Urszula T. Iwaniec; Russell T. Turner,N/A,65,"Bone marrow adipose tissue (MAT) is negatively associated with bone mass. Since osteoblasts and adipocytes are derived from the same precursor cells, adipocyte differentiation may occur at the expense of osteoblast differentiation. We used MAT-deficient",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5389344/
PMC9784906,Mannose Receptor Deficiency Impacts Bone Marrow and Circulating Immune Cells during High Fat Diet Induced Obesity,Jasmine Nour; Annalisa Moregola; Monika Svecla; Lorenzo Da Dalt; Rossella Bellini; Olivier Neyrolles; Gian Paolo Fadini; Yoann Rombouts; Mattia Albiero; Fabrizia Bonacina; Giuseppe Danilo Norata,Mrc1; obesity; bone marrow; inflammation,38,"The mannose receptor C-type 1 (Mrc1) is a C-type lectin receptor expressed on the immune cells and sinusoidal endothelial cells (ECs) of several tissues, including the bone marrow (BM). Parallel to systemic metabolic alterations and hematopoietic cell proliferation, high-fat diet (HFD) feeding increases the expression of Mrc1 in sinusoidal ECs, thus calling for the investigation of its role in bone marrow cell reprogramming and the metabolic profile during obesity.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9784906/
PMC6548323,Maintenance of Near Normal Bone Mass and Architecture in Lethally Irradiated Female Mice following Adoptive Transfer with as few as 750 Purified Hematopoietic Stem Cells,Richard T. Deyhle; Carmen P. Wong; Stephen A. Martin; Melissa Q. McDougall; Dawn A. Olson; Adam J. Branscum; Scott A. Menn; Urszula T. Iwaniec; David M. Hamby; Russell T. Turner,N/A,0,"Total-body irradiation (TBI) followed by transfer of bone marrow cells from donors is routinely performed in immunology research and can be used to manipulate differentiation and/or function of bone cells. However, exposure to high-dose radiation can result in irreversible osteopenia, and transfer of heterogeneous cell populations can complicate interpretation of results. The goal of this research was to establish an approach for reconstituting bone marrow using small numbers of purified donor-derived hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) without negatively affecting bone metabolism. Gamma-irradiated (9 Gy) WBB6F1 mice were engrafted with bone marrow cells (5 × 10",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6548323/
PMC6597714,Effect of Leptin Deficiency on the Skeletal Response to Hindlimb Unloading in Adult Male Mice,Jessica A. Keune; Adam J. Branscum; Carmen P. Wong; Urszula T. Iwaniec; Russell T. Turner,Physiology; Endocrinology,80,"Based on body weight, morbidly obese leptin-deficient",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6597714/
PMC6865368,Thermoneutral housing attenuates premature cancellous bone loss in male C57BL/6J mice,Stephen A Martin; Kenneth A Philbrick; Carmen P Wong; Dawn A Olson; Adam J Branscum; Donald B Jump; Charles K Marik; Jonathan M DenHerder; Jennifer L Sargent; Russell T Turner; Urszula T Iwaniec,animal models; sympathetic signaling; thermogenesis; metabolism; bone formation and resorption,52,"Mice are a commonly used model to investigate aging-related bone loss but, in contrast to humans, mice exhibit cancellous bone loss prior to skeletal maturity. The mechanisms mediating premature bone loss are not well established. However, our previous work in female mice suggests housing temperature is a critical factor. Premature cancellous bone loss was prevented in female C57BL/6J mice by housing the animals at thermoneutral temperature (where basal rate of energy production is at equilibrium with heat loss). In the present study, we determined if the protective effects of thermoneutral housing extend to males. Male C57BL/6J mice were housed at standard room temperature (22°C) or thermoneutral (32°C) conditions from 5 (rapidly growing) to 16 (slowly growing) weeks of age. Mice housed at room temperature exhibited reductions in cancellous bone volume fraction in distal femur metaphysis and fifth lumbar vertebra; these effects were abolished at thermoneutral conditions. Mice housed at thermoneutral temperature had higher levels of bone formation in distal femur (based on histomorphometry) and globally (serum osteocalcin), and lower global levels of bone resorption (serum C-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen) compared to mice housed at room temperature. Thermoneutral housing had no impact on bone marrow adiposity but resulted in higher abdominal white adipose tissue and serum leptin. The overall magnitude of room temperature housing-induced cancellous bone loss did not differ between male (current study) and female (published data) mice. These findings highlight housing temperature as a critical experimental variable in studies using mice of either sex to investigate aging-related changes in bone metabolism.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6865368/
PMC7907224,Effects of spaceflight on cancellous and cortical bone in proximal femur in growing rats,Amanda Gamboa; Adam J. Branscum; Dawn A. Olson; Lara H. Sattgast; Urszula T. Iwaniec; Russell T. Turner,Spaceflight; Proximal femur; Bone microarchitecture; X-ray microtomography/micro-computed tomography; Bone volume/tissue volume; Rat,40,"Mechanical loading of the skeleton during normal weight bearing plays an important role in bone accrual and turnover balance. We recently evaluated bone microarchitecture in the femoral head in 5.6-week-old male Sprague Dawley rats subjected to a 4-day spaceflight aboard STS-41. Compared to weight bearing ground controls, cancellous bone volume fraction was dramatically lower in animals subjected to microgravity. The effects of spaceflight on the rat skeleton are potentially influenced by factors such as age, duration of flight, strain and sex. To test the generalizability of our initial observation, we evaluated archived proximal femora from two additional spaceflight missions: a 10-day mission (STS-57) with 7.5-week-old male Fisher 344 rats, and a 14-day mission (STS-62) with 12-week-old ovariectomized (ovx) female Fisher 344 rats. Cancellous microarchitecture and cortical thickness were assessed using x-ray microtomography/microcomputed tomography. In male rats, cancellous bone volume fraction (bone volume/tissue volume) was lower in flight animals compared to flight controls, but differences were not significant compared to baseline. In ovx female rats, cancellous bone volume fraction was lower in flight animals compared to flight controls and baseline, indicating net bone loss. Cortical thickness did not differ among groups in either experiment. In summary, findings from three separate studies support the conclusion that spaceflight results in cancellous osteopenia in femoral head of growing rats.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7907224/
PMC8213760,Evidence for increased thermogenesis in female C57BL/6J mice housed aboard the international space station,Carmen P. Wong; Urszula T. Iwaniec; Russell T. Turner,Biochemistry; Molecular biology,27,"Sixteen-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were sacrificed aboard the International Space Station after 37 days of flight (RR-1 mission) and frozen carcasses returned to Earth. RNA was isolated from interscapular brown adipose tissue (BAT) and gonadal white adipose tissue (WAT). Spaceflight resulted in differential expression of genes in BAT consistent with increased non-shivering thermogenesis and differential expression of genes in WAT consistent with increased glucose uptake and metabolism, adipogenesis, and β-oxidation.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8213760/
PMC9582271,Leptin and environmental temperature as determinants of bone marrow adiposity in female mice,Russell T. Turner; Kira L. Nesser; Kenneth A. Philbrick; Carmen P. Wong; Dawn A. Olson; Adam J. Branscum; Urszula T. Iwaniec,leptin; BMAT; thermoneutral; room temperature; marrow adipose tissue; histomorphometry,72,"Bone marrow adipose tissue (BMAT) levels are higher in distal femur metaphysis of female mice housed at thermoneutral (32°C) than in mice housed at 22°C, as are abdominal white adipose tissue (WAT) mass, and serum leptin levels. We performed two experiments to explore the role of increased leptin in temperature-enhanced accrual of BMAT. First, we supplemented 6-week-old female C57BL/6J (B6) mice with leptin for 2 weeks at 10 µg/d using a subcutaneously implanted osmotic pump. Controls consisted of",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9582271/
PMC10063413,Small changes in thermoregulation influence cancellous bone turnover balance in distal femur metaphysis in growing female mice,Lara H. Sattgast; Carmen P. Wong; Adam J. Branscum; Dawn A. Olson; Allan M. Aguirre-Burk; Urszula T. Iwaniec; Russell T. Turner,Cold stress; Premature bone loss; Microgravity,0,"Mice are typically housed at temperatures well below their thermoneutral zone. When individually housed at room temperature (~22 °C) mice experience cold stress which results in cancellous bone loss and has the potential to alter the skeletal response to treatment. It is not clear if there is a threshold temperature for cold stress-induced bone loss. It is also not clear if alternative strategies for attenuating cold stress, such as group housing, influence bone accrual and turnover. This study aimed to determine how small differences in temperature (4 °C) or heat loss (individual versus group housing with nestlets) influence bone in growing female C57BL/6 J mice. Five-week-old mice were randomized by weight to 1 of 4 treatment groups (N = 10/group): 1) baseline, 2) single housed at 22 °C, 3) single housed at 26 °C, or 4) group housed (n = 5/cage) with nestlets at 22 °C. Mice in the baseline group were sacrificed 1 week later, at 6 weeks of age. The other 3 groups of mice were maintained at their respective temperatures and housing conditions for 13 weeks until 18 weeks of age. Compared to baseline, mice single housed at room temperature had increased body weight and femur size, but dramatically decreased cancellous bone volume fraction in distal femur metaphysis. The cancellous bone loss was attenuated but not prevented in mice individually housed at 26 °C or group housed at 22 °C. In conclusion, by impacting thermogenesis or heat loss, modest differences in housing conditions could influence experimental results.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10063413/
PMC10889206,Bone Marrow Adipose Tissue Is Not Required for Reconstitution of the Immune System following Irradiation in Male Mice,Jessica A. Keune; Carmen P. Wong; Adam J. Branscum; Scott A. Menn; Urszula T. Iwaniec; Russell T. Turner,bone marrow adipose tissue; BMAT; bone architecture; microcomputed tomography; histology,51,"Bone marrow adipose tissue (BMAT) is hypothesized to serve as an expandable/contractible fat depot which functions, in part, to minimize energy requirements for sustaining optimal hematopoiesis. We investigated whether BMAT is required for immune reconstitution following injury. Male wild type (WBB6F1, WT) and BMAT-deficient WBB6F1/J-",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10889206/
PMC8468678,Simulated Microgravity Promotes Horizontal Gene Transfer of Antimicrobial Resistance Genes between Bacterial Genera in the Absence of Antibiotic Selective Pressure,Camilla Urbaniak; Tristan Grams; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,horizontal gene transfer; simulated microgravity; high aspect ratio vessel (HARV); antimicrobial resistance; space environment,36,"Bacteria are able to adapt and survive in harsh and changing environments through many mechanisms, with one of them being horizontal gene transfer (HGT). This process is one of the leading culprits in the spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) within bacterial communities and could pose a significant health threat to astronauts if they fell ill, especially on long-duration space missions. In order to better understand the degree of HGT activity that could occur in space, biosafety level-2, donor and recipient bacteria were co-cultured under simulated microgravity (SMG) on Earth with concomitant 1G controls. Two AMR genes,",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8468678/
PMC9031868,Understanding the Complexities and Changes of the Astronaut Microbiome for Successful Long-Duration Space Missions,Donatella Tesei; Anna Jewczynko; Anne M. Lynch; Camilla Urbaniak,microbiome; spaceflight; space biology; astronaut; human exploration,470,"During space missions, astronauts are faced with a variety of challenges that are unique to spaceflight and that have been known to cause physiological changes in humans over a period of time. Several of these changes occur at the microbiome level, a complex ensemble of microbial communities residing in various anatomic sites of the human body, with a pivotal role in regulating the health and behavior of the host. The microbiome is essential for day-to-day physiological activities, and alterations in microbiome composition and function have been linked to various human diseases. For these reasons, understanding the impact of spaceflight and space conditions on the microbiome of astronauts is important to assess significant health risks that can emerge during long-term missions and to develop countermeasures. Here, we review various conditions that are caused by long-term space exploration and discuss the role of the microbiome in promoting or ameliorating these conditions, as well as space-related factors that impact microbiome composition. The topics explored pertain to microgravity, radiation, immunity, bone health, cognitive function, gender differences and pharmacomicrobiomics. Connections are made between the trifecta of spaceflight, the host and the microbiome, and the significance of these interactions for successful long-term space missions.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9031868/
PMC10030976,Toward sustainable space exploration: a roadmap for harnessing the power of microorganisms,Rosa Santomartino; Nils J. H. Averesch; Marufa Bhuiyan; Charles S. Cockell; Jesse Colangelo; Yosephine Gumulya; Benjamin Lehner; Ivanna Lopez-Ayala; Sean McMahon; Anurup Mohanty; Sergio R. Santa Maria; Camilla Urbaniak; Rik Volger; Jiseon Yang; Luis Zea,Biotechnology; Applied microbiology; Scientific community; Element cycles,104,"Finding sustainable approaches to achieve independence from terrestrial resources is of pivotal importance for the future of space exploration. This is relevant not only to establish viable space exploration beyond low Earth–orbit, but also for ethical considerations associated with the generation of space waste and the preservation of extra-terrestrial environments. Here we propose and highlight a series of microbial biotechnologies uniquely suited to establish sustainable processes for in situ resource utilization and loop-closure. Microbial biotechnologies research and development for space sustainability will be translatable to Earth applications, tackling terrestrial environmental issues, thereby supporting the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.",2023,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10030976/
PMC5910807,Roll maneuvers are essential for active reorientation of ,Alejandro Bilbao; Amar K. Patel; Mizanur Rahman; Siva A. Vanapalli; Jerzy Blawzdziewicz,undulatory locomotion; 3D gait; maneuverability; behavior,0,Investigations of the free-living nematode,2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5910807/
PMC12021249,Development of a size-separation technique to isolate ,Nikita S. Jhaveri; Maya K. Mastronardo; J.B. Collins; Erik C. Andersen,N/A,29,The free-living nematode,2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12021249/
PMC6057834,NemaFlex: A microfluidics-based technology for standardized measurement of muscular strength of ,Mizanur Rahman; Jennifer E. Hewitt; Frank Van-Bussel; Hunter Edwards; Jerzy Blawzdziewicz; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Monica Driscoll; Siva A. Vanapalli,N/A,0,"Muscle strength is a functional measure of quality of life in humans. Declines in muscle strength are manifested in diseases as well as during inactivity, aging, and space travel. With conserved muscle biology, the simple genetic model",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6057834/
PMC6876156,Swim exercise in ,Ricardo Laranjeiro; Girish Harinath; Jennifer E. Hewitt; Jessica H. Hartman; Mary Anne Royal; Joel N. Meyer; Siva A. Vanapalli; Monica Driscoll,exercise; muscle; aging; neurodegeneration,62,"Exercise is a powerful antiaging intervention that protects against cardiovascular disease, dementia, diabetes, sarcopenia, and cancer. How exercise promotes health benefits to multiple tissues in the body, however, remains poorly understood. We establish a young adult swim exercise regimen for the short-lived nematode",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6876156/
PMC7415877,Molecular Muscle Experiment: Hardware and Operational Lessons for Future Astrobiology Space Experiments,Amelia K. Pollard; Christopher J. Gaffney; Colleen S. Deane; Michele Balsamo; Michael Cooke; Rebecca A. Ellwood; Jennifer E. Hewitt; Beata E. Mierzwa; Alessandro Mariani; Siva A. Vanapalli; Timothy Etheridge; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk,Spaceflight; Space biology; Astrobiology,28,"Biology experiments in space seek to increase our understanding of what happens to life beyond Earth and how we can safely send life beyond Earth. Spaceflight is associated with many (mal)adaptations in physiology, including decline in musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, vestibular, and immune systems. Biological experiments in space are inherently challenging to implement. Development of hardware and validation of experimental conditions are critical to ensure the collection of high-quality data. The model organism",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7415877/
PMC7285199,Tart Cherry Increases Lifespan in ,Shasika Jayarathne; Latha Ramalingam; Hunter Edwards; Siva A. Vanapalli; Naima Moustaid-Moussa,tart cherry; lifespan; aging; oxidative stress,86,Aging and healthspan are determined by both environmental and genetic factors. The insulin/insulin-like growth factor-1(IGF-1) pathway is a key mediator of aging in,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7285199/
PMC9549344,A Region of UNC-89 (obscurin) Lying Between Two Protein Kinase Domains is a Highly Elastic Spring Required for Proper Sarcomere Organization,Hiroshi Qadota; Jasmine C. Moody; Leila Lesanpezeshki; Taylor Moncrief; Deborah Kitzler; Purnima Devaki Bhat; Siva A. Vanapalli; Andres F. Oberhauser; Guy M. Benian,sarcomere; giant polypeptides; UNC-89; obscurin,0,In,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9549344/
PMC7530743,NemaLife chip: a micropillar-based microfluidic culture device optimized for aging studies in crawling ,Mizanur Rahman; Hunter Edwards; Nikolajs Birze; Rebecca Gabrilska; Kendra P. Rumbaugh; Jerzy Blawzdziewicz; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Monica Driscoll; Siva A. Vanapalli,Caenorhabditis elegans; Lab-on-a-chip; Ageing,85,"In this study, we report a microfluidic device for the whole-life culture of the nematode",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7530743/
PMC7890410,Spaceflight affects neuronal morphology and alters transcellular degradation of neuronal debris in adult ,Ricardo Laranjeiro; Girish Harinath; Amelia K. Pollard; Christopher J. Gaffney; Colleen S. Deane; Siva A. Vanapalli; Timothy Etheridge; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Monica Driscoll,neuroscience; developmental neuroscience; space sciences,59,"Extended space travel is a goal of government space agencies and private companies. However, spaceflight poses risks to human health, and the effects on the nervous system have to be better characterized. Here, we exploited the unique experimental advantages of the nematode",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7890410/
PMC9640571,Microfluidics-integrated spaceflight hardware for measuring muscle strength of ,Purushottam Soni; Taslim Anupom; Leila Lesanpezeshki; Mizanur Rahman; Jennifer E. Hewitt; Matthew Vellone; Louis Stodieck; Jerzy Blawzdziewicz; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Siva A. Vanapalli,Human behaviour; Biological techniques,63,N/A,2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9640571/
PMC9862956,A Compact Imaging Platform for Conducting ,Taslim Anupom; Siva A. Vanapalli,phenotyping; microfluidics; spaceflight imaging,62,The model organism,2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9862956/
PMC10410709,Mitochondrial sulfide promotes life span and health span through distinct mechanisms in developing versus adult treated ,Adriana Raluca Vintila; Luke Slade; Michael Cooke; Craig R. G. Willis; Roberta Torregrossa; Mizanur Rahman; Taslim Anupom; Siva A. Vanapalli; Christopher J. Gaffney; Nima Gharahdaghi; Csaba Szabo; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Matthew Whiteman; Timothy Etheridge,health span; longevity; mitochondria; transcriptomics; H,93,"Deteriorating health across the life course is a major societal burden, and effective therapeutics are lacking. Mitochondrial decline has long been associated with age-related health loss. We show that small, clinically meaningful doses of a mitochondrion-targeting sulfur donor (AP39) extend",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10410709/
PMC10751425,Bisphosphonates attenuate age‐related muscle decline in ,Luke Slade; Shelby E. Bollen; Joseph J. Bass; Bethan E. Phillips; Kenneth Smith; Daniel J. Wilkinson; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Philip J. Atherton; Timothy Etheridge,Healthspan; Lifespan; Muscle; Sarcopenia; Zoledronic acid,40,"Age‐related muscle decline (sarcopenia) associates with numerous health risk factors and poor quality of life. Drugs that counter sarcopenia without harmful side effects are lacking, and repurposing existing pharmaceuticals could expedite realistic clinical options. Recent studies suggest bisphosphonates promote muscle health; however, the efficacy of bisphosphonates as an anti‐sarcopenic therapy is currently unclear. Using We found 100 nM and 1 μM ZA increased lifespan ( Despite lacking an endoskeleton, ZA delays",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10751425/
PMC10605753,Spaceflight Induces Strength Decline in ,Purushottam Soni; Hunter Edwards; Taslim Anupom; Mizanur Rahman; Leila Lesanpezeshki; Jerzy Blawzdziewicz; Henry Cope; Nima Gharahdaghi; Daniel Scott; Li Shean Toh; Philip M. Williams; Timothy Etheridge; Nathaniel Szewczyk; Craig R. G. Willis; Siva A. Vanapalli,microgravity; muscle strength; muscle atrophy; spaceflight; dystrophin; International Space Station; omics; gene expression; astropharmacy,129,N/A,2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10605753/
PMC10846184,Metabolic model predictions enable targeted microbiome manipulation through precision prebiotics,Georgios Marinos; Inga K. Hamerich; Reena Debray; Nancy Obeng; Carola Petersen; Jan Taubenheim; Johannes Zimmermann; Dana Blackburn; Buck S. Samuel; Katja Dierking; Andre Franke; Matthias Laudes; Silvio Waschina; Hinrich Schulenburg; Christoph Kaleta,nutritional supplements; flux balance analysis; genome-scale metabolic models; serine,75,"While numerous health-beneficial interactions between host and microbiota have been identified, there is still a lack of targeted approaches for modulating these interactions. Thus, we here identify precision prebiotics that specifically modulate the abundance of a microbiome member species of interest. In the first step, we show that defining precision prebiotics by compounds that are only taken up by the target species but no other species in a community is usually not possible due to overlapping metabolic niches. Subsequently, we use metabolic modeling to identify precision prebiotics for a two-member While various mechanisms through which the microbiome influences disease processes in the host have been identified, there are still only few approaches that allow for targeted manipulation of microbiome composition as a first step toward microbiome-based therapies. Here, we propose the concept of precision prebiotics that allow to boost the abundance of already resident health-beneficial microbial species in a microbiome. We present a constraint-based modeling pipeline to predict precision prebiotics for a minimal microbial community in the worm",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10846184/
PMC11166967,Transcriptomics analysis reveals molecular alterations underpinning spaceflight dermatology,Henry Cope; Jonas Elsborg; Samuel Demharter; J. Tyson McDonald; Chiara Wernecke; Hari Parthasarathy; Hriday Unadkat; Mira Chatrathi; Jennifer Claudio; Sigrid Reinsch; Pinar Avci; Sara R. Zwart; Scott M. Smith; Martina Heer; Masafumi Muratani; Cem Meydan; Eliah Overbey; Jangkeun Kim; Christopher R. Chin; Jiwoon Park; Jonathan C. Schisler; Christopher E. Mason; Nathaniel J. Szewczyk; Craig R. G. Willis; Amr Salam; Afshin Beheshti,Systems biology; Skin diseases,139,"Spaceflight poses a unique set of challenges to humans and the hostile spaceflight environment can induce a wide range of increased health risks, including dermatological issues. The biology driving the frequency of skin issues in astronauts is currently not well understood. To address this issue, we used a systems biology approach utilizing NASA’s Open Science Data Repository (OSDR) on space flown murine transcriptomic datasets focused on the skin, biochemical profiles of 50 NASA astronauts and human transcriptomic datasets generated from blood and hair samples of JAXA astronauts, as well as blood samples obtained from the NASA Twins Study, and skin and blood samples from the first civilian commercial mission, Inspiration4. Key biological changes related to skin health, DNA damage & repair, and mitochondrial dysregulation are identified as potential drivers for skin health risks during spaceflight. Additionally, a machine learning model is utilized to determine gene pairings associated with spaceflight response in the skin. While we identified spaceflight-induced dysregulation, such as alterations in genes associated with skin barrier function and collagen formation, our results also highlight the remarkable ability for organisms to re-adapt back to Earth via post-flight re-tuning of gene expression. Our findings can guide future research on developing countermeasures for mitigating spaceflight-associated skin damage.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11166967/
PMC11302229,Identification and characterization of a skin microbiome on ,Nadia B. Haghani; Robert H. Lampe; Buck S. Samuel; Sreekanth H. Chalasani; Molly A. Matty,skin microbiota; microbiome; 16S RNA,63,"In the wild, The genetic model organism",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11302229/
PMC11487192,Protein kinase 2 of the giant sarcomeric protein UNC-89 regulates mitochondrial morphology and function,Yohei Matsunaga; Hiroshi Qadota; Nasab Ghazal; Leila Lesanpezeshki; Till Dorendorf; Jasmine C. Moody; Arnaud Ahier; Courtney J. Matheny; Siva A. Vanapalli; Steven Zuryn; Olga Mayans; Jennifer Q. Kwong; Guy M. Benian,Cytoskeleton; Cell signalling; Mitochondria,81,"UNC-89 is a giant sarcomeric M-line protein required for sarcomere organization and optimal muscle function. UNC-89 contains two protein kinase domains, PK1 and PK2, separated by an elastic region. Here we show that PK2 is a canonical kinase expected to be catalytically active.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11487192/
PMC3554398,New perspectives on viable microbial communities in low-biomass cleanroom environments,Parag Vaishampayan; Alexander J Probst; Myron T La Duc; Emilee Bargoma; James N Benardini; Gary L Andersen; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,viability; microarray; 454 pyrosequencing; PMA; PhyloChip,0,"The advent of phylogenetic DNA microarrays and high-throughput pyrosequencing technologies has dramatically increased the resolution and accuracy of detection of distinct microbial lineages in mixed microbial assemblages. Despite an expanding array of approaches for detecting microbes in a given sample, rapid and robust means of assessing the differential viability of these cells, as a function of phylogenetic lineage, remain elusive. In this study, pre-PCR propidium monoazide (PMA) treatment was coupled with downstream pyrosequencing and PhyloChip DNA microarray analyses to better understand the frequency, diversity and distribution of viable bacteria in spacecraft assembly cleanrooms. Sample fractions not treated with PMA, which were indicative of the presence of both live and dead cells, yielded a great abundance of highly diverse bacterial pyrosequences. In contrast, only 1% to 10% of all of the pyrosequencing reads, arising from a few robust bacterial lineages, originated from sample fractions that had been pre-treated with PMA. The results of PhyloChip analyses of PMA-treated and -untreated sample fractions were in agreement with those of pyrosequencing. The viable bacterial population detected in cleanrooms devoid of spacecraft hardware was far more diverse than that observed in cleanrooms that housed mission-critical spacecraft hardware. The latter was dominated by hardy, robust organisms previously reported to survive in oligotrophic cleanroom environments. Presented here are the findings of the first ever comprehensive effort to assess the viability of cells in low-biomass environmental samples, and correlate differential viability with phylogenetic affiliation.",2012,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3554398/
PMC10370681,Wild mouse gut microbiota limits initial tuberculosis infection in BALB/c mice,Min Xie; Chen-Yu Tsai; Zachary L. McAdams; Myo Oo; Mark Hansen; Maureen Dougher; Alexander Sansano; Anderson Watson; Katherine LoMauro; Rosleine Antilus-Sainte; Aaron Ericsson; Véronique Dartois; Martin Gengenbacher,N/A,49,"Mouse models are critical tools in tuberculosis (TB) research. Recent studies have demonstrated that the wild mouse gut microbiota promotes host fitness and improves disease resistance. Here we examine whether the wild mouse gut microbiota alters the immunopathology of TB in BALB/c mice. Conventional BALB/c mice (LabC) and mice born to germ-free BALB/c mothers reconstituted with the wild mouse gut microbiota (WildR) were used in our studies. WildR mice controlled initial TB infection better than LabC mice. The microbial gut communities of LabC mice and WildR mice had similar richness but significantly different composition prior to infection. TB reduced the gut community richness in both cohorts while differences in community composition remained indicating a general TB-induced dysbiosis. The wild mouse gut microbiota did not alter the typical lung histopathology of TB in the BALB/c model that includes unstructured immune cell infiltrates with infected foamy macrophages invading alveolar spaces. Animals of both cohorts mounted robust T cell responses in lungs and spleen with lower absolute counts of CD4 and CD8 T cells in lungs of WildR mice during acute infection, corresponding with observed differences in pathogen load. In summary, LabC mice and WildR mice showed largely overlapping TB immunopathology and pathogen kinetics, with WildR mice controlling early acute infection better than LabC mice.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10370681/
PMC4624184,Microbiomes of the dust particles collected from the International Space Station and Spacecraft Assembly Facilities,Aleksandra Checinska; Alexander J. Probst; Parag Vaishampayan; James R. White; Deepika Kumar; Victor G. Stepanov; George E. Fox; Henrik R. Nilsson; Duane L. Pierson; Jay Perry; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,International Space Station; Air; Surface; Microbiome; Closed habitat; Cleanroom; Propidium monoazide,81,"The International Space Station (ISS) is a unique built environment due to the effects of microgravity, space radiation, elevated carbon dioxide levels, and especially continuous human habitation. Understanding the composition of the ISS microbial community will facilitate further development of safety and maintenance practices. The primary goal of this study was to characterize the viable microbiome of the ISS-built environment. A second objective was to determine if the built environments of Earth-based cleanrooms associated with space exploration are an appropriate model of the ISS environment. Samples collected from the ISS and two cleanrooms at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL, Pasadena, CA) were analyzed by traditional cultivation, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and propidium monoazide–quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PMA-qPCR) assays to estimate viable microbial populations. The 16S rRNA gene Illumina iTag sequencing was used to elucidate microbial diversity and explore differences between ISS and cleanroom microbiomes. Statistical analyses showed that members of the phyla Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria were dominant in the samples examined but varied in abundance. Actinobacteria were predominant in the ISS samples whereas Proteobacteria, least abundant in the ISS, dominated in the cleanroom samples. The viable bacterial populations seen by PMA treatment were greatly decreased. However, the treatment did not appear to have an effect on the bacterial composition (diversity) associated with each sampling site. The results of this study provide strong evidence that specific human skin-associated microorganisms make a substantial contribution to the ISS microbiome, which is not the case in Earth-based cleanrooms. For example, The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s40168-015-0116-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.",2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4624184/
PMC4945788,Draft Genome Sequences of Two ,Nitin Kumar Singh; Adriana Blachowicz; Aleksandra Checinska; Clay Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,8,Draft genome sequences of,2016,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4945788/
PMC9116463,Proteomic characterization of ,Adriana Blachowicz; Abby J. Chiang; Jillian Romsdahl; Markus Kalkum; Clay C. C. Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,proteome; the International Space Station,0,The on-going Microbial Observatory Experiments on the International Space Station (ISS) revealed the presence of various microorganisms that may be affected by the distinct environment of the ISS. The low-nutrient environment combined with enhanced irradiation and microgravity may trigger changes in the molecular suite of microorganisms leading to increased virulence and resistance of microbes. Proteomic characterization of two,2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9116463/
PMC5201052,Draft Genome Sequences of Biosafety Level 2 Opportunistic Pathogens Isolated from the Environmental Surfaces of the International Space Station,Aleksandra Checinska Sielaff; Nitin K. Singh; Jonathan E. Allen; James Thissen; Crystal Jaing; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,10,The draft genome sequences of 20 biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) opportunistic pathogens isolated from the environmental surfaces of the International Space Station (ISS) were presented. These genomic sequences will help in understanding the influence of microgravity on the pathogenicity and virulence of these strains when compared with Earth strains.,2016,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5201052/
PMC5391430,Draft Genome Sequences of Several Fungal Strains Selected for Exposure to Microgravity at the International Space Station,Nitin K. Singh; Adriana Blachowicz; Jillian Romsdahl; Clay Wang; Tamas Torok; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,23,The whole-genome sequences of eight fungal strains that were selected for exposure to microgravity at the International Space Station are presented here. These baseline sequences will help to understand the observed production of novel bioactive compounds.,2017,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5391430/
PMC5504618,Human presence impacts fungal diversity of inflated lunar/Mars analog habitat,A. Blachowicz; T. Mayer; M. Bashir; T. R. Pieber; P. De León; K. Venkateswaran,Closed habitat; Surface; Mycobiome; Succession,93,"An inflatable lunar/Mars analog habitat (ILMAH), simulated closed system isolated by HEPA filtration, mimics International Space Station (ISS) conditions and future human habitation on other planets except for the exchange of air between outdoor and indoor environments. The ILMAH was primarily commissioned to measure physiological, psychological, and immunological characteristics of human inhabiting in isolation, but it was also available for other studies such as examining its microbiological aspects. Characterizing and understanding possible changes and succession of fungal species is of high importance since fungi are not only hazardous to inhabitants but also deteriorate the habitats. Observing the mycobiome changes in the presence of human will enable developing appropriate countermeasures with reference to crew health in a future closed habitat. Succession of fungi was characterized utilizing both traditional and state-of-the-art molecular techniques during the 30-day human occupation of the ILMAH. Surface samples were collected at various time points and locations to observe both the total and viable fungal populations of common environmental and opportunistic pathogenic species. To estimate the cultivable fungal population, potato dextrose agar plate counts method was utilized. The internal transcribed spacer region-based iTag Illumina sequencing was employed to measure the community structure and fluctuation of the mycobiome over time in various locations. Treatment of samples with propidium monoazide (PMA; a DNA intercalating dye for selective detection of viable microbial populations) had a significant effect on the microbial diversity compared to non-PMA-treated samples. Statistical analysis confirmed that viable fungal community structure changed (increase in diversity and decrease in fungal burden) over the occupation time. Samples collected at day 20 showed distinct fungal profiles from samples collected at any other time point (before or after). Viable fungal families like The results of this study revealed that the overall fungal diversity in the closed habitat changed during human presence; therefore, it is crucial to properly maintain a closed habitat to preserve it from deteriorating and keep it safe for its inhabitants. Differences in community profiles were observed when statistically treated, especially of the mycobiome of samples collected at day 20. On a genus level The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s40168-017-0280-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5504618/
PMC5580210,Erratum to: Whole metagenome profiles of particulates collected from the International Space Station,Nicholas A. Be; Aram Avila-Herrera; Jonathan E. Allen; Nitin Singh; Aleksandra Checinska Sielaff; Crystal Jaing; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,1,N/A,2017,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5580210/
PMC8421509,Longitudinal characterization of multispecies microbial populations recovered from spaceflight potable water,Jiseon Yang; Jennifer Barrila; C. Mark Ott; Olivia King; Rebekah Bruce; Robert J. C. McLean; Cheryl A. Nickerson,Microbiome; Biofilms,87,"While sequencing technologies have revolutionized our knowledge of microbial diversity, little is known about the dynamic emergent phenotypes that arise within the context of mixed-species populations, which are not fully predicted using sequencing technologies alone. The International Space Station (ISS) is an isolated, closed human habitat that can be harnessed for cross-sectional and longitudinal functional microbiome studies. Using NASA-archived microbial isolates collected from the ISS potable water system over several years, we profiled five phenotypes: antibiotic resistance, metabolism, hemolysis, and biofilm structure/composition of individual or multispecies communities, which represent characteristics that could negatively impact astronaut health and life-support systems. Data revealed a temporal dependence on interactive behaviors, suggesting possible microbial adaptation over time within the ecosystem. This study represents one of the most extensive phenotypic characterization of ISS potable water microbiota with implications for microbial risk assessments of water systems in built environments in space and on Earth.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8421509/
PMC5552977,Draft Genome Sequences from a Novel Clade of ,Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Aleksandra Checinska Sielaff; Shashikala Ratnayake; Robert K. Pope; Thomas E. Blank; Victor G. Stepanov; George E. Fox; Sandra P. van Tongeren; Clinton Torres; Jonathan Allen; Crystal Jaing; Duane Pierson; Jay Perry; Sergey Koren; Adam Phillippy; Joy Klubnik; Todd J. Treangen; M. J. Rosovitz; Nicholas H. Bergman,N/A,11,The draft genome sequences of six,2017,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5552977/
PMC5805884,Draft Genome Sequences of ,Arman Seuylemezian; Parag Vaishampayan; Kerry Cooper; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,14,We report here the draft genome sequences of four strains isolated from spacecraft-associated surfaces exhibiting increased resistance to stressors such as UV radiation and exposure to H,2018,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5805884/
PMC5864415,KatharoSeq Enables High-Throughput Microbiome Analysis from Low-Biomass Samples,Jeremiah J. Minich; Qiyun Zhu; Stefan Janssen; Ryan Hendrickson; Amnon Amir; Russ Vetter; John Hyde; Megan M. Doty; Kristina Stillwell; James Benardini; Jae H. Kim; Eric E. Allen; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Rob Knight,16S rRNA amplicon; abalone; built environment; low biomass; metagenomics; microbial ecology; neonatal intensive care unit; NICU,37,"Various indoor, outdoor, and host-associated environments contain small quantities of microbial biomass and represent a niche that is often understudied because of technical constraints. Many studies that attempt to evaluate these low-biomass microbiome samples are riddled with erroneous results that are typically false positive signals obtained during the sampling process. We have investigated various low-biomass kits and methods to determine the limit of detection of these pipelines. Here we present KatharoSeq, a high-throughput protocol combining laboratory and bioinformatic methods that can differentiate a true positive signal in samples with as few as 50 to 500 cells. We demonstrate the application of this method in three unique low-biomass environments, including a SAF, a hospital NICU, and an abalone-rearing facility.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5864415/
PMC6013642,Draft Genome Sequence of a Clinical Isolate of ,Camilla Urbaniak; Sanjeet Dadwal; Karine Bagramyan; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,3,"Here, we present the draft whole-genome sequence of a clinical isolate of",2018,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6013642/
PMC5578834,Draft Genome Sequence of ,Arman Seuylemezian; Nitin K. Singh; Parag Vaishampayan; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,5,We report here the draft genome of,2017,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5578834/
PMC9241228,"Microbial Tracking-2, a metagenomics analysis of bacteria and fungi onboard the International Space Station",Camilla Urbaniak; Michael D. Morrison; James B. Thissen; Fathi Karouia; David J. Smith; Satish Mehta; Crystal Jaing; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,International Space Station; Microbial monitoring; Microbiome; Metagenomics; Microbial tracking; Built environment,58,"The International Space Station (ISS) is a unique and complex built environment with the ISS surface microbiome originating from crew and cargo or from life support recirculation in an almost entirely closed system. The Microbial Tracking 1 (MT-1) project was the first ISS environmental surface study to report on the metagenome profiles without using whole-genome amplification. The study surveyed the microbial communities from eight surfaces over a 14-month period. The Microbial Tracking 2 (MT-2) project aimed to continue the work of MT-1, sampling an additional four flights from the same locations, over another 14 months. Eight surfaces across the ISS were sampled with sterile wipes and processed upon return to Earth. DNA extracted from the processed samples (and controls) were treated with propidium monoazide (PMA) to detect intact/viable cells or left untreated and to detect the total DNA population (free DNA/compromised cells/intact cells/viable cells). DNA extracted from PMA-treated and untreated samples were analyzed using shotgun metagenomics. Samples were cultured for bacteria and fungi to supplement the above results. Utilizing various metagenomics analyses and culture methods, we provided a comprehensive analysis of the ISS surface microbiome, showing microbial burden, bacterial and fungal species prevalence, changes in the microbiome, and resistome over time and space, as well as the functional capabilities and microbial interactions of this unique built microbiome. Data from this study may help to inform policies for future space missions to ensure an ISS surface microbiome that promotes astronaut health and spacecraft integrity. Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01293-0.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9241228/
PMC5958250,Draft Genome Sequences of Two ,Camilla Urbaniak; Gioia Massa; Mary Hummerick; Christina Khodadad; Andrew Schuerger; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,9,"Here, we present the whole-genome sequences of two",2018,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5958250/
PMC7326050,Metabolomic Analysis of ,Jillian Romsdahl; Adriana Blachowicz; Yi-Ming Chiang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Clay C. C. Wang,secondary metabolites; International Space Station; pyranonigrin A; antioxidant,56,Secondary metabolite (SM) production in,2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7326050/
PMC6251167,Multi-drug resistant ,Nitin K. Singh; Daniela Bezdan; Aleksandra Checinska Sielaff; Kevin Wheeler; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,International Space Station; Phylogenomic analyses,54,"The antimicrobial resistance (AMR) phenotypic properties, multiple drug resistance (MDR) gene profiles, and genes related to potential virulence and pathogenic properties of five Molecular phylogeny and whole genome analysis of the ISS strains with all publicly available Given the MDR results for these ISS The online version of this article (10.1186/s12866-018-1325-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6251167/
PMC6280456,Correction to: Succession and persistence of microbial communities and antimicrobial resistance genes associated with International Space Station environmental surfaces,Nitin Kumar Singh; Jason M. Wood; Fathi Karouia; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,1,N/A,2018,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6280456/
PMC9098231,"International Space Station conditions alter genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics in ",Jillian Romsdahl; Adriana Blachowicz; Abby J. Chiang; Yi-Ming Chiang; Sawyer Masonjones; Junko Yaegashi; Stefanie Countryman; Fathi Karouia; Markus Kalkum; Jason E. Stajich; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Clay C.C. Wang,International Space Station; genomics; proteomics; metabolomics,0,"The first global genomic, proteomic, and secondary metabolomic characterization of the filamentous fungus",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9098231/
PMC9116463,Proteomic characterization of ,Adriana Blachowicz; Abby J. Chiang; Jillian Romsdahl; Markus Kalkum; Clay C. C. Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,proteome; the International Space Station,0,The on-going Microbial Observatory Experiments on the International Space Station (ISS) revealed the presence of various microorganisms that may be affected by the distinct environment of the ISS. The low-nutrient environment combined with enhanced irradiation and microgravity may trigger changes in the molecular suite of microorganisms leading to increased virulence and resistance of microbes. Proteomic characterization of two,2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9116463/
PMC6426649,Genomic Characterization and Virulence Potential of Two ,Camilla Urbaniak; Peter van Dam; Alexander Zaborin; Olga Zaborina; Jack A. Gilbert; Tamas Torok; Clay C. C. Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,International Space Station; fungi; genomics,71,This is the first study to isolate and characterize,2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6426649/
PMC6452512,Characterization of the total and viable bacterial and fungal communities associated with the International Space Station surfaces,Aleksandra Checinska Sielaff; Camilla Urbaniak; Ganesh Babu Malli Mohan; Victor G. Stepanov; Quyen Tran; Jason M. Wood; Jeremiah Minich; Daniel McDonald; Teresa Mayer; Rob Knight; Fathi Karouia; George E. Fox; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,International Space Station; Microbiome; 16S rRNA; ITS; Environmental surface; Built microbiome; Propidium monoazide; Microbial diversity,105,"The International Space Station (ISS) is a closed system inhabited by microorganisms originating from life support systems, cargo, and crew that are exposed to unique selective pressures such as microgravity. To date, mandatory microbial monitoring and observational studies of spacecraft and space stations have been conducted by traditional culture methods, although it is known that many microbes cannot be cultured with standard techniques. To fully appreciate the true number and diversity of microbes that survive in the ISS, molecular and culture-based methods were used to assess microbial communities on ISS surfaces. Samples were taken at eight pre-defined locations during three flight missions spanning 14 months and analyzed upon return to Earth. The cultivable bacterial and fungal population ranged from 10 The results reveal a diverse population of bacteria and fungi on ISS environmental surfaces that changed over time but remained similar between locations. The dominant organisms are associated with the human microbiome and may include opportunistic pathogens. This study provides the first comprehensive catalog of both total and intact/viable bacteria and fungi found on surfaces in closed space systems and can be used to help develop safety measures that meet NASA requirements for deep space human habitation. The results of this study can have significant impact on our understanding of other confined built environments on the Earth such as clean rooms used in the pharmaceutical and medical industries. The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-019-0666-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6452512/
PMC6529585,Proteomic and Metabolomic Characteristics of Extremophilic Fungi Under Simulated Mars Conditions,Adriana Blachowicz; Abby J. Chiang; Andreas Elsaesser; Markus Kalkum; Pascale Ehrenfreund; Jason E. Stajich; Tamas Torok; Clay C. C. Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,fungi; simulated mars conditions; proteome; metabolome; Chernobyl; international space station; extremophiles,76,"Filamentous fungi have been associated with extreme habitats, including nuclear power plant accident sites and the International Space Station (ISS). Due to their immense adaptation and phenotypic plasticity capacities, fungi may thrive in what seems like uninhabitable niches. This study is the first report of fungal survival after exposure of monolayers of conidia to simulated Mars conditions (SMC). Conidia of several Chernobyl nuclear accident-associated and ISS-isolated strains were tested for UV-C and SMC sensitivity, which resulted in strain-dependent survival. Strains surviving exposure to SMC for 30 min, ISSFT-021-30 and IMV 00236-30, were further characterized for proteomic, and metabolomic changes. Differential expression of proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis, translation, and carbohydrate metabolic processes was observed. No significant metabolome alterations were revealed. Lastly, ISSFT-021-30 conidia re-exposed to UV-C exhibited enhanced UV-C resistance when compared to the conidia of unexposed ISSFT-021.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6529585/
PMC6952069,MetaMiner: A Scalable Peptidogenomics Approach for Discovery of Ribosomal Peptide Natural Products with Blind Modifications from Microbial Communities,Liu Cao; Alexey Gurevich; Kelsey L. Alexander; C. Benjamin Naman; Tiago Leão; Evgenia Glukhov; Tal Luzzatto-Knaan; Fernando Vargas; Robby Quinn; Amina Bouslimani; Louis Felix Nothias; Nitin K. Singh; Jon G. Sanders; Rodolfo A. S. Benitez; Luke R. Thompson; Md-Nafiz Hamid; James T. Morton; Alla Mikheenko; Alexander Shlemov; Anton Korobeynikov; Iddo Friedberg; Rob Knight; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; William H. Gerwick; Lena Gerwick; Pieter C. Dorrestein; Pavel A. Pevzner; Hosein Mohimani,Ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides; computational mass spectrometry; metagenomics; natural products discovery; microbial metabolites,0,"Ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides (RiPPs) are an important class of natural products that contain antibiotics and a variety of other bioactive compounds. The existing methods for discovery of RiPPs by combining genome mining and computational mass spectrometry are limited to discovering specific classes of RiPPs from small datasets, and they fail to handle unknown post-translational modifications. We present MetaMiner, a software tool for addressing these challenges that is compatible with large-scale screening platforms for natural product discovery. After searching millions of spectra in the Global Natural Products Social (GNPS) molecular networking infrastructure against just eight genomic and metagenomic datasets, MetaMiner discovered 31 known and seven unknown RiPPs from diverse microbial communities including human microbiome, lichen microbiome, and micro-organisms isolated from the International Space Station.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6952069/
PMC7303416,Draft Genome Sequences of ,Swati Bijlani; Nitin K. Singh; Christopher E. Mason; Clay C. C. Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,14,The draft genome sequences of three,2020,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7303416/
PMC7317102,Draft Genome Sequences of ,Swati Bijlani; Nitin K. Singh; Christopher E. Mason; Clay C. C. Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,10,The draft genome sequences of six eukaryotic microbial strains belonging to the class,2020,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7317102/
PMC7393961,Draft Genome Sequences of ,Robert Daudu; Ceth W. Parker; Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Marilyne Debieu; Niamh B. O’Hara; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,17,The whole-genome sequences (WGS) of 28 isolates from the International Space Station were generated and identified as,2020,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7393961/
PMC7484075,Draft Genome Sequences of ,Achintya R. Bharadwaj; Robert Daudu; Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Marilyne Debieu; Niamh B. O’Hara; Fathi Karouia; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,13,"The whole-genome sequences of 26 strains isolated from the International Space Station were generated, and the strains were identified as being members of the order",2020,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7484075/
PMC7516158,Draft Genome Sequences of ,Achintya R. Bharadwaj; Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Marilyne Debieu; Niamh B. O’Hara; Fathi Karouia; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,13,Nineteen strains from the order,2020,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7516158/
PMC7561690,Draft Genome Sequences of ,Samuel A. Solomon; Achintya R. Bharadwaj; Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Marilyne Debieu; Niamh B. O’Hara; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,13,"Isolated across four locations aboard the International Space Station (ISS), 10 bacterial strains were compared using whole-genome sequencing analysis and were phylogenetically identified as",2020,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7561690/
PMC7595942,Draft Genome Sequences of ,Robert Daudu; Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Marilyne Debieu; Niamh B. O'Hara; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,12,The draft genome sequences of 29 bacterial isolates belonging to the family,2020,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7595942/
PMC7677455,Assessing the Risk of Transfer of Microorganisms at the International Space Station Due to Cargo Delivery by Commercial Resupply Vehicles,Snehit Mhatre; Jason M. Wood; Aleksandra Checinska Sielaff; Maximilian Mora; Stefanie Duller; Nitin Kumar Singh; Fathi Karouia; Christine Moissl-Eichinger; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,forward contamination; microbial diversity; commercial resupply vehicle; viability; International Space Station,60,"With increasing numbers of interplanetary missions, there is a need to establish robust protocols to ensure the protection of extraterrestrial planets being visited from contamination by terrestrial life forms. The current study is the first report comparing the commercial resupply vehicle (CRV) microbiome with the International Space Station (ISS) microbiome to understand the risks of contamination, thus serving as a model system for future planetary missions. Samples obtained from the internal surfaces and ground support equipment of three CRV missions were subjected to various molecular techniques for microbial diversity analysis. In total, 25 samples were collected with eight defined locations from each CRV mission prior to launch. In general, the internal surfaces of vehicles were clean, with an order of magnitude fewer microbes compared to ground support equipment. The first CRV mission had a larger microbial population than subsequent CRV missions, which were clean as compared to the initial CRV locations sampled. Cultivation assays showed the presence of The metagenome sequence comparison of the CRV microbiome with the ISS microbiome revealed significant differences showing that CRV microbiomes were a negligible part of the ISS environmental microbiome. These findings suggest that the maintenance protocols in cleaning CRV surfaces are highly effective in controlling the contaminating microbial population during cargo transfer to the ISS via the CRV route.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7677455/
PMC8005752,,Swati Bijlani; Nitin K. Singh; V. V. Ramprasad Eedara; Appa Rao Podile; Christopher E. Mason; Clay C. C. Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,polyphasic taxomony; ANI; international space station (ISS); whole genome sequencing,49,Four strains belonging to the family of,2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8005752/
PMC8104057,Draft Genome Sequences of ,Adriana Blachowicz; Nitin Kumar Singh; Jason M. Wood; Marilyne Debieu; Niamh B. O’Hara; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,18,The draft whole-genome sequences (WGS) of 30 fungal strains isolated from the International Space Station and belonging to the,2021,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8104057/
PMC12034939,"
",Maria Cortazar‐Chinarro; Kayla C. King; Mette Lillie,climate change; evolutionary processes; genetic diversity; host–parasite interactions; MHC,146,"Most natural populations are genetically diverse. Understanding how diversity is maintained and distributed across time and space can provide insights into the potential for evolution and extinction of populations. Immunogenetic diversity aids individuals and populations in resisting infectious disease, with many studies linking resistance to genes encoding adaptive immune responses, such as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes. The MHC is particularly important for advancing our understanding of local adaptive processes and host–parasite interactions. Here, we review the emerging work and theory exploring the geographic and temporal patterns of MHC diversity in the wild and how they are shaped by selective and demographic processes. We discuss patterns of variation along latitudinal and altitudinal gradients and place this in the context of Latitude Diversity Gradient and Central Marginal Theories. We emphasize how MHC diversity is often lower at the edges of species distributions, particularly in high‐latitude and high‐altitude regions. We also discuss MHC diversity in natural populations facing climate change. As climate change accelerates and emerging parasites spread, reduced immunogenetic diversity could severely threaten wildlife populations, compromising their resilience and long‐term survival. We propose that including immunogenetic diversity into a larger database of environmental and parasite data would allow biologists to test hypotheses regarding host–parasite coevolution and develop effective measures for conservation.",2025,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12034939/
PMC8012687,Effects of Simulated Microgravity on the Proteome and Secretome of the Polyextremotolerant Black Fungus ,Donatella Tesei; Abby J. Chiang; Markus Kalkum; Jason E. Stajich; Ganesh Babu Malli Mohan; Katja Sterflinger; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,microgravity; black fungi; extremophiles; secretomics; proteomics; astrobiology,122,"Black fungi are a group of melanotic microfungi characterized by remarkable polyextremotolerance. Due to a broad ecological plasticity and adaptations at the cellular level, it is predicted that they may survive in a variety of extreme environments, including harsh niches on Earth and Mars, and in outer space. However, the molecular mechanisms aiding survival, especially in space, are yet to be fully elucidated. Based on these premises, the rock-inhabiting black fungus",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8012687/
PMC8086211,Draft Genome Sequences of Various Bacterial Phyla Isolated from the International Space Station,Anna C. Simpson; Camilla Urbaniak; Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Marilyne Debieu; Niamh B. O’Hara; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,30,"Whole-genome sequences were generated from 96 bacterial strains of 14 species that were isolated from International Space Station surfaces during the Microbial Tracking 2 study. Continued characterization of this closed habitat's microbiome enables tracking of the spread and evolution of secondary pathogens, which is vital for astronaut health.",2021,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8086211/
PMC8211661,Evaluating the lettuce metatranscriptome with MinION sequencing for future spaceflight food production applications,Natasha J. Haveman; Christina L. M. Khodadad; Anirudha R. Dixit; Artemis S. Louyakis; Gioia D. Massa; Kasthuri Venkateswaran; Jamie S. Foster,Microbiology; Plant sciences,82,"Healthy plants are vital for successful, long-duration missions in space, as they provide the crew with life support, food production, and psychological benefits. The microorganisms that associate with plant tissues play a critical role in improving plant health and production. To that end, we developed a methodology to investigate the transcriptional activities of the microbiome of red romaine lettuce, a key salad crop that was grown under International Space Station (ISS)-like conditions. Microbial transcripts enriched from host–microbe total RNA were sequenced using the Oxford Nanopore MinION sequencing platform. Results show that this enrichment approach was highly reproducible and could be an effective approach for the on-site detection of microbial transcriptional activity. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of using metatranscriptomics of enriched microbial RNA as a potential method for on-site monitoring of the transcriptional activity of crop microbiomes, thereby helping to facilitate and maintain plant health for on-orbit space food production.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8211661/
PMC11988970,Molecular Mechanism of Microgravity-Induced Intestinal Flora Dysbiosis on the Abnormalities of Liver and Brain Metabolism,Yi Xiong; Jianguo Guo; Wenchen Yu; Deyong Zeng; Chenchen Song; Li Zhou; Nadtochii Liudmila Anatolyevna; Denis Baranenko; Dan Xiao; Yingyu Zhou; Weihong Lu,microgravity; gut microbiota; metabolic dysfunction; liver; brain; 3D-Clinostat,90,"Space flight has many adverse effects on the physiological functions of astronauts. Certain similarities have been observed in some physiological processes of rodents and astronauts in space, although there are also differences. These similarities make rodents helpful models for initial investigations into space-induced physiological changes. This study uses a 3D-Clinostat to simulate microgravity and explores the role of microgravity in space flight-induced liver and brain abnormalities by comparing changes in the gut microbiota, serum metabolites, and the function and physiological biochemistry of liver and brain tissues between the simulated microgravity (SMG) group mice and the wild type (WT) group mice. The study, based on hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining, 16S sequencing technology, and non-targeted metabolomics analysis, shows that the gut tissue morphology of the SMG group mice is abnormal, and the structure of the gut microbiota and the serum metabolite profile are imbalanced. Furthermore, using PICRUST 2 technology, we have predicted the functions of the gut microbiota and serum metabolites, and the results indicate that the liver metabolism and functions (including lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and sugar metabolism, etc.) of the SMG group mice are disrupted, and the brain tissue metabolism and functions (including neurotransmitters and hormone secretion, etc.) are abnormal, suggesting a close relationship between microgravity and liver metabolic dysfunction and brain dysfunction. Additionally, the high similarity in the structure of the gut microbiota and serum metabolite profile between the fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) group mice and the SMG group mice, and the physiological and biochemical differences in liver and brain tissues compared to the WT group mice, suggest that microgravity induces imbalances in the gut microbiota, which in turn triggers abnormalities in liver and brain metabolism and function. Finally, through MetaMapp analysis and Pearson correlation analysis, we found that valeric acid, a metabolite of gut microbiota, is more likely to be the key metabolite that relates to microgravity-induced gut microbiota abnormalities, disorders of amino acid and lipid metabolism, and further induced metabolic or functional disorders in the liver and brain. This study has significant practical application value for deepening the understanding of the adaptability of living organisms in the space environment.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11988970/
PMC8754149,Genomic Characterization of Potential Plant Growth-Promoting Features of ,Jonathan Lombardino; Swati Bijlani; Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Richard Barker; Simon Gilroy; Clay C. C. Wang; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,International Space Station; phytohormones; plant growth promotion,76,"In an ongoing microbial tracking investigation of the International Space Station (ISS), several",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8754149/
PMC8875396,Genomic Characterization of the Titan-like Cell Producing ,Swati Bijlani; Ceth Parker; Nitin K. Singh; Maria A. Sierra; Jonathan Foox; Clay C. C. Wang; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,yeast; International Space Station; phylogenetic analyses; Titan-like cells; simulated microgravity,81,Multiple strains of a novel yeast belonging to genus,2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8875396/
PMC9258157,Metabolic modeling of the International Space Station microbiome reveals key microbial interactions,Rachita K. Kumar; Nitin Kumar Singh; Sanjaay Balakrishnan; Ceth W. Parker; Karthik Raman; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,Microbial communities; Space microbiome; Community modeling; Network biology; Metabolic networks,56,"Recent studies have provided insights into the persistence and succession of microbes aboard the International Space Station (ISS), notably the dominance of Through a combination of a systems-based graph-theoretical approach, and a constraint-based community metabolic modeling approach, we demonstrated several key interactions in the ISS microbiome. These complementary approaches provided insights into the metabolic interactions and dependencies present amongst various microbes in a community, highlighting key interactions and keystone species. Our results showed that the presence of Our study underscores the importance of Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01279-y.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9258157/
PMC9503880,"Microbial Burden Estimation of Food Items, Built Environments, and the International Space Station Using Film Media",Anna C. Simpson; Takeo Suzuki; Daniel R. Miller; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,CFU; International Space Station; environmental microbiome; agar media; film media; Easy Plate; Petrifilm,45,"The use of film media involves considerably less preparation, waste, and incubator space than conventional agar-media-based assays and has proven in past studies to provide counts of cultivable microbes similar to those of traditional agar media. Film media also have the advantage of allowing sample volumes similar to those used in pour plates and, therefore, are well-suited for cultivable microbial counts in extremely low-biomass environments such as clean rooms or space habitats, particularly where the subsequent isolation of colonies is necessary. As the preparation of film media plates relies on water cohesion/adhesion rather than manual spreading, they may have future applications in low- or microgravity settings. In this study, cultivable microbial count performance was compared between agar media and film media in three kinds of samples: food items, surfaces in built environments on Earth (homes), and on the environmental surfaces of the International Space Station (ISS). Easy Plates (Kikkoman Corporation) and Petrifilm (3M) were compared with traditional agar plating for food and home surfaces, while only Easy Plates were compared with agar for ISS samples. For both food items and built environments on Earth, both types of film media performed comparably to agar media for bacterial counts, with R",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9503880/
PMC9743659,Multidrug-resistant ,Braden T. Tierney; Nitin K. Singh; Anna C. Simpson; Andrea M. Hujer; Robert A. Bonomo; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,N/A,56,"Monitoring the adaptation of microorganisms to the extreme environment of the International Space Station (ISS) is crucial to understanding microbial evolution and infection prevention. Here, we report how ISS-associated Overall, these results indicated a step forward in understanding how microorganisms might evolve and alter their antibiotic resistance phenotype in extreme, resource-limited, human-built environments. Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01358-0.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9743659/
PMC10233975,Characterization of metagenome-assembled genomes from the International Space Station,Nitin K. Singh; Jason M. Wood; Jose Patane; Livia Maria Silva Moura; Jonathan Lombardino; João Carlos Setubal; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,Metagenome-assembled genomes; Genome-inferred phenotype; Microgravity; ISS,51,"Several investigations on the microbial diversity and functional properties of the International Space Station (ISS) environment were carried out to understand the influence of spaceflight conditions on the microbial population. However, metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) of ISS samples are yet to be generated and subjected to various genomic analyses, including phylogenetic affiliation, predicted functional pathways, antimicrobial resistance, and virulence characteristics. In total, 46 MAGs were assembled from 21 ISS environmental metagenomes, in which metaSPAdes yielded 20 MAGs and metaWRAP generated 26 MAGs. Among 46 MAGs retrieved, 18 bacterial species were identified, including one novel genus/species combination ( Comparative analyses of MAGs and whole-genome sequences of related ISS isolates and their type strains were characterized to understand the variation related to the microbial evolution under microgravity. The Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-023-01545-7.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10233975/
PMC10308117,Comparative genomic analysis of ,Anna C. Simpson; V. V. Ramprasad Eedara; Nitin K. Singh; Namita Damle; Ceth W. Parker; Fathi Karouia; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,International Space Station (ISS); novel bacteria; space biology; pangenome analysis,89,A single strain from the family,2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10308117/
PMC10715203,Genomic analysis reveals the presence of emerging pathogenic ,Georgios Miliotis; Francesca McDonagh; Nitin Kumar Singh; Louise O'Connor; Alma Tuohy; Dearbháile Morris; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,hypervirulence; microgravity; International Space Station,64,"The International Space Station (ISS) is a unique, hermetically sealed environment, subject to environmental pressures not encountered on Earth, including microgravity and radiation (cosmic ionising/UV). While bacteria's adaptability during spaceflight remains elusive, recent research suggests that it may be species and even clone-specific. Considering the documented spaceflight-induced suppression of the human immune system, a deper understanding of the genomics of potential human pathogens in space could shed light on species and lineages of medical astromicrobiological significance. In this study, we used hybrid assembly methods and comparative genomics to deliver a comprehensive genomic characterization of 10",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10715203/
PMC10628120,"Phylogenomics, phenotypic, and functional traits of five novel (Earth-derived) bacterial species isolated from the International Space Station and their prevalence in metagenomes",Anna C. Simpson; Pratyay Sengupta; Flora Zhang; Asif Hameed; Ceth W. Parker; Nitin K. Singh; Georgios Miliotis; Punchappady D. Rekha; Karthik Raman; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,Environmental microbiology; Functional genomics; Genome; Prokaryote,88,"With the advent of long-term human habitation in space and on the moon, understanding how the built environment microbiome of space habitats differs from Earth habitats, and how microbes survive, proliferate and spread in space conditions, is becoming more important. The microbial tracking mission series has been monitoring the microbiome of the International Space Station (ISS) for almost a decade. During this mission series, six unique strains of Gram-stain-positive bacteria, including two spore-forming and three non-spore-forming species, were isolated from the environmental surfaces of the ISS. The analysis of their 16S rRNA gene sequences revealed > 99% similarities with previously described bacterial species. To further explore their phylogenetic affiliation, whole genome sequencing was undertaken. For all strains, the gyrB gene exhibited < 93% similarity with closely related species, which proved effective in categorizing these ISS strains as novel species. Average nucleotide identity and digital DNA–DNA hybridization values, when compared to any known bacterial species, were < 94% and <50% respectively for all species described here. Traditional biochemical tests, fatty acid profiling, polar lipid, and cell wall composition analyses were performed to generate phenotypic characterization of these ISS strains. A study of the shotgun metagenomic reads from the ISS samples, from which the novel species were isolated, showed that only 0.1% of the total reads mapped to the novel species, supporting the idea that these novel species are rare in the ISS environments. In-depth annotation of the genomes unveiled a variety of genes linked to amino acid and derivative synthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, cofactors, vitamins, prosthetic groups, pigments, and protein metabolism. Further analysis of these ISS-isolated organisms revealed that, on average, they contain 46 genes associated with virulence, disease, and defense. The main predicted functions of these genes are: conferring resistance to antibiotics and toxic compounds, and enabling invasion and intracellular resistance. After conducting antiSMASH analysis, it was found that there are roughly 16 cluster types across the six strains, including β-lactone and type III polyketide synthase (T3PKS) clusters. Based on these multi-faceted taxonomic methods, it was concluded that these six ISS strains represent five novel species, which we propose to name as follows:",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10628120/
PMC10960378,"Genomic, functional, and metabolic enhancements in multidrug-resistant ",Pratyay Sengupta; Shobhan Karthick Muthamilselvi Sivabalan; Nitin Kumar Singh; Karthik Raman; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,Pangenome analysis; Metabolic modelling; ISS metagenomics,66,"The International Space Station (ISS) stands as a testament to human achievement in space exploration. Despite its highly controlled environment, characterised by microgravity, increased CO Distinct from their Earth counterparts, ISS Our comprehensive analysis illuminated not only the ways these interactions sculpt microbial diversity but also the factors that might contribute to the potential dominance and succession of Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-024-01777-1.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10960378/
PMC10628120,"Phylogenomics, phenotypic, and functional traits of five novel (Earth-derived) bacterial species isolated from the International Space Station and their prevalence in metagenomes",Anna C. Simpson; Pratyay Sengupta; Flora Zhang; Asif Hameed; Ceth W. Parker; Nitin K. Singh; Georgios Miliotis; Punchappady D. Rekha; Karthik Raman; Christopher E. Mason; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,Environmental microbiology; Functional genomics; Genome; Prokaryote,88,"With the advent of long-term human habitation in space and on the moon, understanding how the built environment microbiome of space habitats differs from Earth habitats, and how microbes survive, proliferate and spread in space conditions, is becoming more important. The microbial tracking mission series has been monitoring the microbiome of the International Space Station (ISS) for almost a decade. During this mission series, six unique strains of Gram-stain-positive bacteria, including two spore-forming and three non-spore-forming species, were isolated from the environmental surfaces of the ISS. The analysis of their 16S rRNA gene sequences revealed > 99% similarities with previously described bacterial species. To further explore their phylogenetic affiliation, whole genome sequencing was undertaken. For all strains, the gyrB gene exhibited < 93% similarity with closely related species, which proved effective in categorizing these ISS strains as novel species. Average nucleotide identity and digital DNA–DNA hybridization values, when compared to any known bacterial species, were < 94% and <50% respectively for all species described here. Traditional biochemical tests, fatty acid profiling, polar lipid, and cell wall composition analyses were performed to generate phenotypic characterization of these ISS strains. A study of the shotgun metagenomic reads from the ISS samples, from which the novel species were isolated, showed that only 0.1% of the total reads mapped to the novel species, supporting the idea that these novel species are rare in the ISS environments. In-depth annotation of the genomes unveiled a variety of genes linked to amino acid and derivative synthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, cofactors, vitamins, prosthetic groups, pigments, and protein metabolism. Further analysis of these ISS-isolated organisms revealed that, on average, they contain 46 genes associated with virulence, disease, and defense. The main predicted functions of these genes are: conferring resistance to antibiotics and toxic compounds, and enabling invasion and intracellular resistance. After conducting antiSMASH analysis, it was found that there are roughly 16 cluster types across the six strains, including β-lactone and type III polyketide synthase (T3PKS) clusters. Based on these multi-faceted taxonomic methods, it was concluded that these six ISS strains represent five novel species, which we propose to name as follows:",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10628120/
PMC11451251,Adaptation to space conditions of novel bacterial species isolated from the International Space Station revealed by functional gene annotations and comparative genome analysis,Lukasz M. Szydlowski; Alper A. Bulbul; Anna C. Simpson; Deniz E. Kaya; Nitin K. Singh; Ugur O. Sezerman; Paweł P. Łabaj; Tomasz Kosciolek; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,Functional annotation; International space station; Extremophiles,81,"The extreme environment of the International Space Station (ISS) puts selective pressure on microorganisms unintentionally introduced during its 20+ years of service as a low-orbit science platform and human habitat. Such pressure leads to the development of new features not found in the Earth-bound relatives, which enable them to adapt to unfavorable conditions. In this study, we generated the functional annotation of the genomes of five newly identified species of Gram-positive bacteria, four of which are non-spore-forming and one spore-forming, all isolated from the ISS. Using a deep-learning based tool—deepFRI—we were able to functionally annotate close to 100% of protein-coding genes in all studied species, overcoming other annotation tools. Our comparative genomic analysis highlights common characteristics across all five species and specific genetic traits that appear unique to these ISS microorganisms. Proteome analysis mirrored these genomic patterns, revealing similar traits. The collective annotations suggest adaptations to life in space, including the management of hypoosmotic stress related to microgravity via mechanosensitive channel proteins, increased DNA repair activity to counteract heightened radiation exposure, and the presence of mobile genetic elements enhancing metabolism. In addition, our findings suggest the evolution of certain genetic traits indicative of potential pathogenic capabilities, such as small molecule and peptide synthesis and ATP-dependent transporters. These traits, exclusive to the ISS microorganisms, further substantiate previous reports explaining why microbes exposed to space conditions demonstrate enhanced antibiotic resistance and pathogenicity. Our findings indicate that the microorganisms isolated from ISS we studied have adapted to life in space. Evidence such as mechanosensitive channel proteins, increased DNA repair activity, as well as metallopeptidases and novel S-layer oxidoreductases suggest a convergent adaptation among these diverse microorganisms, potentially complementing one another within the context of the microbiome. The common genes that facilitate adaptation to the ISS environment may enable bioproduction of essential biomolecules need during future space missions, or serve as potential drug targets, if these microorganisms pose health risks. Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-024-01916-8.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11451251/
PMC5523082,Spatial regulation of a common precursor from two distinct genes generates metabolite diversity,Chun-Jun Guo; Wei-Wen Sun; Kenneth S. Bruno; Berl R. Oakley; Nancy P. Keller; Clay C. C. Wang,N/A,36,,2015,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5523082/
PMC6590338,Recent advances in the genome mining of ,Jillian Romsdahl; Clay C. C. Wang,N/A,0,,2019,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6590338/
PMC6036641,Cortical Thinning and Structural Bone Changes in Non-human Primates Following Single Fraction Whole Chest Radiation,Michael Farris; Emory R. McTyre; Catherine Okoukoni; Greg Dugan; Brendan J. Johnson; William Blackstock; Michael T. Munley; J. Daniel Bourland; J. Mark Cline; Jeffrey S. Willey,N/A,0,Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is associated with an increased risk of vertebral compression fracture (,2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6036641/
PMC6599637,Knee and Hip Joint Cartilage Damage from Combined Spaceflight Hazards of Low-Dose Radiation Less than 1 Gy and Prolonged Hindlimb Unloading,Andy T. Kwok; Joseph E. Moore; Samuel Rosas; Bethany A. Kerr; Rachel N. Andrews; Callistus M. Nguyen; Jingyun Lee; Cristina M. Furdui; Boyce E. Collins; Michael T. Munley; Jeffrey S. Willey,N/A,0,"Kwok, A. T., Moore, J. E., Rosas, S., Kerr, B. A., Andrews, R. N., Nguyen, C. M., Lee, J., Furdui, C. M., Collins, B. E., Munley, M. T. and Willey, J. S. Knee and Hip Joint Cartilage Damage from Combined Spaceflight Hazards of Low-Dose Radiation Less than 1 Gy and Prolonged Hinlimb Unloading. Reduced weight bearing, and to a lesser extent radiation, during spaceflight have been shown as potential hazards to astronaut joint health. These hazards combined effect to the knee and hip joints are not well defined, particularly with low-dose exposure to radiation. In this study, we examined the individual and combined effects of varying low-dose radiation (≤1 Gy) and reduced weight bearing on the cartilage of the knee and hip joints. C57BL/6J mice (n = 80) were either tail suspended via hindlimb unloading (HLU) or remained full-weight bearing (ground). On day 6, each group was divided and irradiated with 0 Gy (sham), 0.1 Gy, 0.5 Gy or 1.0 Gy (n = 10/group), yielding eight groups: ground-sham; ground-0.1 Gy; ground-0.5 Gy; ground-1.0 Gy; HLU-sham; HLU-0.1 Gy; HLU-0.5 Gy; and HLU-1.0 Gy. On day 30, the hindlimbs, hip cartilage and serum were collected from the mice. Significant differences were identified statistically between treatment groups and the ground-sham control group, but no significant differences were observed between HLU and/or radiation groups. Contrast-enhanced micro-computed tomography (micro-CECT) demonstrated decrease in volume and thickness at the weight-bearing femoral-tibial cartilage-cartilage contact point in all treatment groups compared to ground-sham. Lower collagen was observed in all groups compared to ground-sham. Circulating serum cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (sCOMP), a biomarker for ongoing cartilage degradation, was increased in all of the irradiated groups compared to ground-sham, regardless of unloading. Mass spectrometry of the cartilage lining the femoral head and subsequent Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) identified a decrease in cartilage compositional proteins indicative of osteoarthritis. Our findings demonstrate that both individually and combined, HLU and exposure to spaceflight-relevant radiation doses lead to cartilage degradation of the knee and hip with expression of an arthritic phenotype. Moreover, early administration of low-dose irradiation (0.1, 0.5 or 1.0 Gy) causes an active catabolic response in cartilage 24 days postirradiation. Further research is warranted with a focus on the prevention of cartilage degradation from long-term periods of reduced weight bearing and spaceflight-relevant low doses and qualities of radiation.",2019,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6599637/
PMC8274610,THE INDIVIDUAL AND COMBINED EFFECTS OF SPACEFLIGHT RADIATION AND MICROGRAVITY ON BIOLOGIC SYSTEMS AND FUNCTIONAL OUTCOMES,Jeffrey S. Willey; Richard A. Britten; Elizabeth Blaber; Candice G.T. Tahimic; Jeffrey Chancellor; Marie Mortreux; Larry D. Sanford; Angela J. Kubik; Michael D. Delp; Xiao Wen Mao,Hind limb unloading; tail suspension; radiation; spaceflight; cognition; cardiovascular; SANS; bone; stem cell,0,"Both microgravity and radiation exposure in the spaceflight environment have been identified as hazards to astronaut health and performance. Substantial study has been focused on understanding the biology and risks associated with prolonged exposure to microgravity, and the hazards presented by radiation from galactic cosmic rays (GCR) and solar particle events (SPEs) outside of low earth orbit (LEO). To date, the majority of the ground-based analogues (e.g., rodent or cell culture studies) that investigate the biology of and risks associated with spaceflight hazards will focus on an individual hazard in isolation. However, astronauts will face these challenges simultaneously Combined hazard studies are necessary for understanding the risks astronauts face as they travel outside of LEO, and are also critical for countermeasure development. The focus of this review is to describe biologic and functional outcomes from ground-based analogue models for microgravity and radiation, specifically highlighting the combined effects of radiation and reduced weight-bearing from rodent ground-based tail suspension via hind limb unloading (HLU) and partial weight-bearing (PWB) models, although in vitro and spaceflight results are discussed as appropriate. The review focuses on the skeletal, ocular, central nervous system (CNS), cardiovascular, and stem cells responses.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8274610/
PMC8131644,Spaceflight and hind limb unloading induces an arthritic phenotype in knee articular cartilage and menisci of rodents,Andy T. Kwok; Nequesha S. Mohamed; Johannes F. Plate; Raghunatha R. Yammani; Samuel Rosas; Ted A. Bateman; Eric Livingston; Joseph E. Moore; Bethany A. Kerr; Jingyun Lee; Cristina M. Furdui; Li Tan; Mary L. Bouxsein; Virginia L. Ferguson; Louis S. Stodieck; David C. Zawieja; Michael D. Delp; Xiao W. Mao; Jeffrey S. Willey,Physiology; Structural biology; Anatomy; Pathogenesis,60,"Reduced knee weight-bearing from prescription or sedentary lifestyles are associated with cartilage degradation; effects on the meniscus are unclear. Rodents exposed to spaceflight or hind limb unloading (HLU) represent unique opportunities to evaluate this question. This study evaluated arthritic changes in the medial knee compartment that bears the highest loads across the knee after actual and simulated spaceflight, and recovery with subsequent full weight-bearing. Cartilage and meniscal degradation in mice were measured via microCT, histology, and proteomics and/or biochemically after: (1) ~ 35 days on the International Space Station (ISS); (2) 13-days aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis; or (3) 30 days of HLU, followed by a 49-day weight-bearing readaptation with/without exercise. Cartilage degradation post-ISS and HLU occurred at similar spatial locations, the tibial-femoral cartilage-cartilage contact point, with meniscal volume decline. Cartilage and meniscal glycosaminoglycan content were decreased in unloaded mice, with elevated catabolic enzymes (e.g., matrix metalloproteinases), and elevated oxidative stress and catabolic molecular pathway responses in menisci. After the 13-day Shuttle flight, meniscal degradation was observed. During readaptation, recovery of cartilage volume and thickness occurred with exercise. Reduced weight-bearing from either spaceflight or HLU induced an arthritic phenotype in cartilage and menisci, and exercise promoted recovery.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8131644/
PMC9163032,αKlotho decreases after reduced weight-bearing from both spaceflight and hindlimb unloading,Jeffrey S. Willey; Serena Aunon-Chancellor; Lauren A. Miles; Joseph E. Moore; Xiao W. Mao; Robert W. Wallace; Matthew C. Foy,Predictive markers; Physiology,18,"Alpha(α)Klotho, a soluble transmembrane protein, facilitates calcium-phosphorus homeostasis through feedback between bone and kidney and is a potential systemic biomarker for bone-kidney health during spaceflight. We determined if: (1) plasma αKlotho was reduced after both spaceflight aboard the ISS and hindlimb unloading (HU); and (2) deficiency could be reversed with exercise. Both spaceflight and HU lowered circulating plasma αKlotho: plasma αKlotho recovered with exercise after HU.",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9163032/
PMC5568470,Prolonged Exposure to Particulate Chromate Inhibits RAD51 Nuclear Import Mediator Proteins,Cynthia L. Browning; John Pierce Wise,Nuclear import; Particulate chromium (VI); RAD51C; BRCA2; RAD51 cytoplasmic accumulation,0,"Particulate hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) is a human lung carcinogen and a human health concern. The induction of structural chromosome instability is considered to be a driving mechanism of Cr(VI)-induced carcinogenesis. Homologous recombination repair protects against Cr(VI)-induced chromosome damage, due to its highly accurate repair of Cr(VI)-induced DNA double strand breaks. However, recent studies demonstrate Cr(VI) inhibits homologous recombination repair through the misregulation of RAD51. RAD51 is an essential protein in HR repair that facilitates the search for a homologous sequence. Recent studies show prolonged Cr(VI) exposure prevents proper RAD51 subcellular localization, causing it to accumulate in the cytoplasm. Since nuclear import of RAD51 is crucial to its function, this study investigated the effect of Cr(VI) on the RAD51 nuclear import mediators, RAD51C and BRCA2. We show acute (24 h) Cr(VI) exposure induces the proper localization of RAD51C and BRCA2. In contrast, prolonged (120 h) exposure increased the cytoplasmic localization of both proteins, although RAD51C localization was more severely impaired. These results correlate temporally with the previously reported Cr(VI)-induced RAD51 cytoplasmic accumulation. In addition, we found Cr(VI) does not inhibit interaction between RAD51 and its nuclear import mediators. Altogether, our results suggest prolonged Cr(VI) exposure inhibits the nuclear import of RAD51C, and to a lesser extent, BRCA2, which results in the cytoplasmic accumulation of RAD51. Cr(VI)-induced inhibition of nuclear import may play a key role in its carcinogenic mechanism since the nuclear import of many tumor suppressor proteins and DNA repair proteins is crucial to their function.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5568470/
PMC5485990,"Transcriptomics, NF-κB Pathway, and Their Potential Spaceflight-Related Health Consequences",Ye Zhang; Maria Moreno-Villanueva; Stephanie Krieger; Govindarajan T. Ramesh; Srujana Neelam; Honglu Wu,transcriptome; spaceflight; NF-κB pathway; human disease,90,"In space, living organisms are exposed to multiple stress factors including microgravity and space radiation. For humans, these harmful environmental factors have been known to cause negative health impacts such as bone loss and immune dysfunction. Understanding the mechanisms by which spaceflight impacts human health at the molecular level is critical not only for accurately assessing the risks associated with spaceflight, but also for developing effective countermeasures. Over the years, a number of studies have been conducted under real or simulated space conditions. RNA and protein levels in cellular and animal models have been targeted in order to identify pathways affected by spaceflight. Of the many pathways responsive to the space environment, the nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) network appears to commonly be affected across many different cell types under the true or simulated spaceflight conditions. NF-κB is of particular interest, as it is associated with many of the spaceflight-related health consequences. This review intends to summarize the transcriptomics studies that identified NF-κB as a responsive pathway to ground-based simulated microgravity or the true spaceflight condition. These studies were carried out using either human cell or animal models. In addition, the review summarizes the studies that focused specifically on NF-κB pathway in specific cell types or organ tissues as related to the known spaceflight-related health risks including immune dysfunction, bone loss, muscle atrophy, central nerve system (CNS) dysfunction, and risks associated with space radiation. Whether the NF-κB pathway is activated or inhibited in space is dependent on the cell type, but the potential health impact appeared to be always negative. It is argued that more studies on NF-κB should be conducted to fully understand this particular pathway for the benefit of crew health in space.",2017,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5485990/
PMC5460239,Interplay of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage and DNA damage response,María Moreno-Villanueva; Michael Wong; Tao Lu; Ye Zhang; Honglu Wu,N/A,66,"In space, multiple unique environmental factors, particularly microgravity and space radiation, pose constant threat to the DNA integrity of living organisms. Specifically, space radiation can cause damage to DNA directly, through the interaction of charged particles with the DNA molecules themselves, or indirectly through the production of free radicals. Although organisms have evolved strategies on Earth to confront such damage, space environmental conditions, especially microgravity, can impact DNA repair resulting in accumulation of severe DNA lesions. Ultimately these lesions, namely double strand breaks, chromosome aberrations, micronucleus formation, or mutations, can increase the risk for adverse health effects, such as cancer. How spaceflight factors affect DNA damage and the DNA damage response has been investigated since the early days of the human space program. Over the years, these experiments have been conducted either in space or using ground-based analogs. This review summarizes the evidence for DNA damage induction by space radiation and/or microgravity as well as spaceflight-related impacts on the DNA damage response. The review also discusses the conflicting results from studies aimed at addressing the question of potential synergies between microgravity and radiation with regard to DNA damage and cellular repair processes. We conclude that further experiments need to be performed in the true space environment in order to address this critical question.",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5460239/
PMC6275019,"Synergistic Effects of Weightlessness, Isoproterenol, and Radiation on DNA Damage Response and Cytokine Production in Immune Cells",Maria Moreno-Villanueva; Alan H. Feiveson; Stephanie Krieger; AnneMarie Kay Brinda; Gudrun von Scheven; Alexander Bürkle; Brian Crucian; Honglu Wu,radiation; simulated microgravity; DNA damage response; adrenergic receptor; cytokines,110,"The implementation of rotating-wall vessels (RWVs) for studying the effect of lack of gravity has attracted attention, especially in the fields of stem cells, tissue regeneration, and cancer research. Immune cells incubated in RWVs exhibit several features of immunosuppression including impaired leukocyte proliferation, cytokine responses, and antibody production. Interestingly, stress hormones influence cellular immune pathways affected by microgravity, such as cell proliferation, apoptosis, DNA repair, and T cell activation. These pathways are crucial defense mechanisms that protect the cell from toxins, pathogens, and radiation. Despite the importance of the adrenergic receptor in regulating the immune system, the effect of microgravity on the adrenergic system has been poorly studied. Thus, we elected to investigate the synergistic effects of isoproterenol (a sympathomimetic drug), radiation, and microgravity in nonstimulated immune cells. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were treated with the sympathomimetic drug isoproterenol, exposed to 0.8 or 2 Gy γ-radiation, and incubated in RWVs. Mixed model regression analyses showed significant synergistic effects on the expression of the β2-adrenergic receptor gene (ADRB2). Radiation alone increased ADRB2 expression, and cells incubated in microgravity had more DNA strand breaks than cells incubated in normal gravity. We observed radiation-induced cytokine production only in microgravity. Prior treatment with isoproterenol clearly prevents most of the microgravity-mediated effects. RWVs may be a useful tool to provide insight into novel regulatory pathways, providing benefit not only to astronauts but also to patients suffering from immune disorders or undergoing radiotherapy.",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6275019/
PMC5397022,Transcriptome and proteome responses in RNAlater preserved tissue of ,Colin P. S. Kruse; Proma Basu; Darron R. Luesse; Sarah E. Wyatt,N/A,17,"Tissue preservation is a minimal requirement for the success of plant RNA and protein expression studies. The standard of snap-freezing in liquid nitrogen is not always practical or possible. RNAlater, a concentrated solution of ammonium and cesium sulfates, has become a standard preservative in the absence of liquid nitrogen. Here, we demonstrate the effectiveness of RNAlater in preserving both RNA and proteins in",2017,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5397022/
PMC7251690,Spaceflight induces novel regulatory responses in Arabidopsis seedling as revealed by combined proteomic and transcriptomic analyses,Colin P. S. Kruse; Alexander D. Meyers; Proma Basu; Sarahann Hutchinson; Darron R. Luesse; Sarah E. Wyatt,Gravity; Spaceflight; Arabidopsis; Gravitropism; Transcriptomics; Proteomics; Phosphorylation; Post-transcriptional gene regulation; Plastid,52,"Understanding of gravity sensing and response is critical to long-term human habitation in space and can provide new advantages for terrestrial agriculture. To this end, the altered gene expression profile induced by microgravity has been repeatedly queried by microarray and RNA-seq experiments to understand gravitropism. However, the quantification of altered protein abundance in space has been minimally investigated. Proteomic (iTRAQ-labelled LC-MS/MS) and transcriptomic (RNA-seq) analyses simultaneously quantified protein and transcript differential expression of three-day old, etiolated The datasets gathered from Arabidopsis seedlings exposed to microgravity revealed marked impacts on post-transcriptional regulation, cell wall synthesis, redox/microtubule dynamics, and plastid gene transcription. The impact of post-transcriptional regulatory alterations represents an unstudied element of the plant microgravity response with the potential to significantly impact plant growth efficiency and beyond. What’s more, addressing the effects of microgravity on AHA2, CESA1, and alpha tubulins has the potential to enhance cytoskeletal organization and cell wall composition, thereby enhancing biomass production and growth in microgravity. Finally, understanding and manipulating the dysregulation of plastid gene transcription has further potential to address the goal of enhancing plant growth in the stressful conditions of microgravity.",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7251690/
PMC10284894,Microbial applications for sustainable space exploration beyond low Earth orbit,Allison P. Koehle; Stephanie L. Brumwell; Emily P. Seto; Anne M. Lynch; Camilla Urbaniak,Microbiology; Biotechnology; Biological techniques,476,"With the construction of the International Space Station, humans have been continuously living and working in space for 22 years. Microbial studies in space and other extreme environments on Earth have shown the ability for bacteria and fungi to adapt and change compared to “normal” conditions. Some of these changes, like biofilm formation, can impact astronaut health and spacecraft integrity in a negative way, while others, such as a propensity for plastic degradation, can promote self-sufficiency and sustainability in space. With the next era of space exploration upon us, which will see crewed missions to the Moon and Mars in the next 10 years, incorporating microbiology research into planning, decision-making, and mission design will be paramount to ensuring success of these long-duration missions. These can include astronaut microbiome studies to protect against infections, immune system dysfunction and bone deterioration, or biological in situ resource utilization (bISRU) studies that incorporate microbes to act as radiation shields, create electricity and establish robust plant habitats for fresh food and recycling of waste. In this review, information will be presented on the beneficial use of microbes in bioregenerative life support systems, their applicability to bISRU, and their capability to be genetically engineered for biotechnological space applications. In addition, we discuss the negative effect microbes and microbial communities may have on long-duration space travel and provide mitigation strategies to reduce their impact. Utilizing the benefits of microbes, while understanding their limitations, will help us explore deeper into space and develop sustainable human habitats on the Moon, Mars and beyond.",2023,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10284894/
PMC10030976,Toward sustainable space exploration: a roadmap for harnessing the power of microorganisms,Rosa Santomartino; Nils J. H. Averesch; Marufa Bhuiyan; Charles S. Cockell; Jesse Colangelo; Yosephine Gumulya; Benjamin Lehner; Ivanna Lopez-Ayala; Sean McMahon; Anurup Mohanty; Sergio R. Santa Maria; Camilla Urbaniak; Rik Volger; Jiseon Yang; Luis Zea,Biotechnology; Applied microbiology; Scientific community; Element cycles,104,"Finding sustainable approaches to achieve independence from terrestrial resources is of pivotal importance for the future of space exploration. This is relevant not only to establish viable space exploration beyond low Earth–orbit, but also for ethical considerations associated with the generation of space waste and the preservation of extra-terrestrial environments. Here we propose and highlight a series of microbial biotechnologies uniquely suited to establish sustainable processes for in situ resource utilization and loop-closure. Microbial biotechnologies research and development for space sustainability will be translatable to Earth applications, tackling terrestrial environmental issues, thereby supporting the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.",2023,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10030976/
PMC8421509,Longitudinal characterization of multispecies microbial populations recovered from spaceflight potable water,Jiseon Yang; Jennifer Barrila; C. Mark Ott; Olivia King; Rebekah Bruce; Robert J. C. McLean; Cheryl A. Nickerson,Microbiome; Biofilms,87,"While sequencing technologies have revolutionized our knowledge of microbial diversity, little is known about the dynamic emergent phenotypes that arise within the context of mixed-species populations, which are not fully predicted using sequencing technologies alone. The International Space Station (ISS) is an isolated, closed human habitat that can be harnessed for cross-sectional and longitudinal functional microbiome studies. Using NASA-archived microbial isolates collected from the ISS potable water system over several years, we profiled five phenotypes: antibiotic resistance, metabolism, hemolysis, and biofilm structure/composition of individual or multispecies communities, which represent characteristics that could negatively impact astronaut health and life-support systems. Data revealed a temporal dependence on interactive behaviors, suggesting possible microbial adaptation over time within the ecosystem. This study represents one of the most extensive phenotypic characterization of ISS potable water microbiota with implications for microbial risk assessments of water systems in built environments in space and on Earth.",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8421509/
PMC9964234,Designing a Novel Monitoring Approach for the Effects of Space Travel on Astronauts’ Health,Anurag Sakharkar; Jian Yang,space biology; diagnostic assay; health; transcriptome; space flight,57,"Space exploration and extraterrestrial civilization have fascinated humankind since the earliest days of human history. It was only in the last century that humankind finally began taking significant steps towards these goals by sending astronauts into space, landing on the moon, and building the International Space Station. However, space voyage is very challenging and dangerous, and astronauts are under constant space radiation and microgravity. It has been shown that astronauts are at a high risk of developing a broad range of diseases/disorders. Thus, it is critical to develop a rapid and effective assay to monitor astronauts’ health in space. In this study, gene expression and correlation patterns were analyzed for 10 astronauts (8 male and 2 female) using the publicly available microarray dataset E-GEOD-74708. We identified 218 differentially expressed genes between In-flight and Pre-flight and noticed that space travel decreased genome regulation and gene correlations across the entire genome, as well as individual signaling pathways. Furthermore, we systematically developed a shortlist of 32 genes that could be used to monitor astronauts’ health during space travel. Further studies, including microgravity experiments, are warranted to optimize and validate the proposed assay.",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9964234/
PMC10793275,Draft genome sequence of ,Sara Koroli; Kristina Buss; Joy M. Blain; Gautam Sai Nakka; Mina Hong; Robert JC McLean; Caroline M. Plugge; Jiseon Yang,draft genome; WGS; water,20,"Sphingomonadaceae are common membrane colonizers and biofilm formers. As part of our studies on long-term genetic changes in drinking water biofilm species, we report the draft genome sequence of",2024,brief-report,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10793275/
PMC4116675,Overexpression of CupB5 activates alginate overproduction in ,Anna K. de Regt; Yeshi Yin; T. Ryan Withers; Xin Wang; Tania A. Baker; Robert T. Sauer; Hongwei D. Yu,alginate; MucA; MucB; CupB5; signal transduction,0,In,2014,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4116675/
PMC5810432,Burn Injury-Associated MHCII,Walter E. Cromer; Scott D. Zawieja; Karen M. Doersch; Hayden Stagg; Felicia Hunter; Binu Tharakan; Ed Childs; David C. Zawieja,burn; lymphatic; macrophage; permeability,0,"It is theorized that toxic agents are transported from the hyperpermeable gut of burn victims through the lymph, to the systemic circulation, causing global injury. We believe that immune cells respond to leakage of “toxic lymph” following trauma causing the attraction of these cells to the perilymphatic space. To test this, we utilized a model of burn on rats to examine changes in a single immune cell population associated with mesenteric lymphatic dysfunction. We examined the ability of serum from these animals to increase permeability in lymphatic endothelial monolayers and disrupt cellular junctions. We also treated burn animals with doxycycline, an inhibitor of microvascular permeability, and observed the effects on immune cell populations, morphometry, and lymphatic endothelial permeability. Burn injury increased the number of MHCII",2018,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5810432/
PMC10261121,Future space experiment platforms for astrobiology and astrochemistry research,Andreas Elsaesser; David J. Burr; Paul Mabey; Riccardo Giovanni Urso; Daniela Billi; Charles Cockell; Hervé Cottin; Adrienne Kish; Natalie Leys; Jack J. W. A. van Loon; Eva Mateo-Marti; Christine Moissl-Eichinger; Silvano Onofri; Richard C. Quinn; Elke Rabbow; Petra Rettberg; Rosa de la Torre Noetzel; Klaus Slenzka; Antonio J. Ricco; Jean-Pierre de Vera; Frances Westall,Environmental sciences; Microbiology; Techniques and instrumentation; Evolution; Biogeochemistry,77,"Space experiments are a technically challenging but a scientifically important part of astrobiology and astrochemistry research. The International Space Station (ISS) is an excellent example of a highly successful and long-lasting research platform for experiments in space, that has provided a wealth of scientific data over the last two decades. However, future space platforms present new opportunities to conduct experiments with the potential to address key topics in astrobiology and astrochemistry. In this perspective, the European Space Agency (ESA) Topical Team Astrobiology and Astrochemistry (with feedback from the wider scientific community) identifies a number of key topics and summarizes the 2021 “ESA SciSpacE Science Community White Paper” for astrobiology and astrochemistry. We highlight recommendations for the development and implementation of future experiments, discuss types of in situ measurements, experimental parameters, exposure scenarios and orbits, and identify knowledge gaps and how to advance scientific utilization of future space-exposure platforms that are either currently under development or in an advanced planning stage. In addition to the ISS, these platforms include CubeSats and SmallSats, as well as larger platforms such as the Lunar Orbital Gateway. We also provide an outlook for in situ experiments on the Moon and Mars, and welcome new possibilities to support the search for exoplanets and potential biosignatures within and beyond our solar system.",2023,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10261121/
PMC8739323,The smallest space miners: principles of space biomining,Rosa Santomartino; Luis Zea; Charles S. Cockell,Space biomining; ISRU; Space bioleaching; BLSS; Space microbiology; Bioremediation; Space sustainability,196,"As we aim to expand human presence in space, we need to find viable approaches to achieve independence from terrestrial resources. Space biomining of the Moon, Mars and asteroids has been indicated as one of the promising approaches to achieve in-situ resource utilization by the main space agencies. Structural and expensive metals, essential mineral nutrients, water, oxygen and volatiles could be potentially extracted from extraterrestrial regolith and rocks using microbial-based biotechnologies. The use of bioleaching microorganisms could also be applied to space bioremediation, recycling of waste and to reinforce regenerative life support systems. However, the science around space biomining is still young. Relevant differences between terrestrial and extraterrestrial conditions exist, including the rock types and ores available for mining, and a direct application of established terrestrial biomining techniques may not be a possibility. It is, therefore, necessary to invest in terrestrial and space-based research of specific methods for space applications to learn the effects of space conditions on biomining and bioremediation, expand our knowledge on organotrophic and community-based bioleaching mechanisms, as well as on anaerobic biomining, and investigate the use of synthetic biology to overcome limitations posed by the space environments.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8739323/
PMC8739323,The smallest space miners: principles of space biomining,Rosa Santomartino; Luis Zea; Charles S. Cockell,Space biomining; ISRU; Space bioleaching; BLSS; Space microbiology; Bioremediation; Space sustainability,196,"As we aim to expand human presence in space, we need to find viable approaches to achieve independence from terrestrial resources. Space biomining of the Moon, Mars and asteroids has been indicated as one of the promising approaches to achieve in-situ resource utilization by the main space agencies. Structural and expensive metals, essential mineral nutrients, water, oxygen and volatiles could be potentially extracted from extraterrestrial regolith and rocks using microbial-based biotechnologies. The use of bioleaching microorganisms could also be applied to space bioremediation, recycling of waste and to reinforce regenerative life support systems. However, the science around space biomining is still young. Relevant differences between terrestrial and extraterrestrial conditions exist, including the rock types and ores available for mining, and a direct application of established terrestrial biomining techniques may not be a possibility. It is, therefore, necessary to invest in terrestrial and space-based research of specific methods for space applications to learn the effects of space conditions on biomining and bioremediation, expand our knowledge on organotrophic and community-based bioleaching mechanisms, as well as on anaerobic biomining, and investigate the use of synthetic biology to overcome limitations posed by the space environments.",2022,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8739323/
PMC9502502,"Simulated Micro-, Lunar, and Martian Gravities on Earth—Effects on ",Lily A. Allen; Amir H. Kalani; Frederico Estante; Aaron J. Rosengren; Louis Stodieck; David Klaus; Luis Zea,clinostat; minimum inhibitory concentration; MIC; rpoS; cell size; aggregation; ciprofloxacin; gentamicin; urinary tract infection; UTI; spaceflight,51,"Bacterial behavior has been studied under microgravity conditions, but very little is known about it under lunar and Martian gravitational regimes. An Earth-based approach was designed and implemented using inclined clinostats and an in-house-developed code to determine the optimal clinorotation angular speed for bacterial liquid cultures of 5 RPM. With this setup, growth dynamics, phenotypic changes, and sensitivity to antibiotics (minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of two different classes of antibiotics) for three",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9502502/
PMC10432549,Biofilm formation of ,Pamela Flores; Samantha A. McBride; Jonathan M. Galazka; Kripa K. Varanasi; Luis Zea,Microbiology; Molecular biology; Aerospace engineering,103,"The undesirable, yet inevitable, presence of bacterial biofilms in spacecraft poses a risk to the proper functioning of systems and to astronauts’ health. To mitigate the risks that arise from them, it is important to understand biofilms’ behavior in microgravity. As part of the Space Biofilms project, biofilms of",2023,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10432549/
PMC7261848,Competitive Growth Assay of Mutagenized ,Junya Zhang; Bárbara S. F. Müller; Kevin N. Tyre; Hope L. Hersh; Fang Bai; Ying Hu; Marcio F. R. Resende; Bala Rathinasabapathi; A. Mark Settles,algae; space environment; genetic fitness; population genetics,49,"A biological life support system for spaceflight would capture carbon dioxide waste produced by living and working in space to generate useful organic compounds. Photosynthesis is the primary mechanism to fix carbon into organic molecules. Microalgae are highly efficient at converting light, water, and carbon dioxide into biomass, particularly under limiting, artificial light conditions that are a necessity in space photosynthetic production. Although there is great promise in developing algae for chemical or food production in space, most spaceflight algae growth studies have been conducted on solid agar-media to avoid handling liquids in microgravity. Here we report that breathable plastic tissue culture bags can support robust growth of",2020,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7261848/
PMC8537831,Spatial Characterization of Microbial Communities on Multi-Species Leafy Greens Grown Simultaneously in the Vegetable Production Systems on the International Space Station,Mary E. Hummerick; Christina L. M. Khodadad; Anirudha R. Dixit; Lashelle E. Spencer; Gretchen J. Maldonado-Vasquez; Jennifer L. Gooden; Cory J. Spern; Jason A. Fischer; Nicole Dufour; Raymond M. Wheeler; Matthew W. Romeyn; Trent M. Smith; Gioia D. Massa; Ye Zhang,veggie; ISS; microbiome; lettuce; mizuna; phyllosphere; rhizosphere; microgravity,82,"The establishment of steady-state continuous crop production during long-term deep space missions is critical for providing consistent nutritional and psychological benefits for the crew, potentially improving their health and performance. Three technology demonstrations were completed achieving simultaneous multi-species plant growth and the concurrent use of two Veggie units on the International Space Station (ISS). Microbiological characterization using molecular and culture-based methods was performed on leaves and roots from two harvests of three leafy greens, red romaine lettuce (",2021,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8537831/
PMC8879990,Response of ,Ye Zhang; Jeffrey T. Richards; Alan H. Feiveson; Stephanie E. Richards; Srujana Neelam; Thomas W. Dreschel; Ianik Plante; Megumi Hada; Honglu Wu; Gioia D. Massa; Grace L. Douglas; Howard G. Levine,space radiation; galactic cosmic rays; solar particle event; mizuna mustard; seeds,48,"One of the major concerns for long-term exploration missions beyond the Earth’s magnetosphere is consequences from exposures to solar particle event (SPE) protons and galactic cosmic rays (GCR). For long-term crewed Lunar and Mars explorations, the production of fresh food in space will provide both nutritional supplements and psychological benefits to the astronauts. However, the effects of space radiation on plants and plant propagules have not been sufficiently investigated and characterized. In this study, we evaluated the effect of two different compositions of charged particles-simulated GCR, and simulated SPE protons on dry and hydrated seeds of the model plant",2022,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8879990/
PMC10472590,Editorial: Revisiting the limits of plant life - plant adaptations to extreme terrestrial environments relating to astrobiology and space biology,Agata K. Zupanska; Carmen Arena; Gustavo E. Zuñiga; Angelica Casanova-Katny; Johanna D. Turnbull; León A. Bravo; Patricio Ramos; Hang Sun; Vladimir V. Shishov,plant; extreme environment; astrobiology; deep space exploration; limits of life,7,N/A,2023,editorial,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10472590/
PMC11999716,Metagenomic interrogation of urban Superfund site reveals antimicrobial resistance reservoir and bioremediation potential,Sergios-Orestis Kolokotronis; Chandrima Bhattacharya; Rupobrata Panja; Ian Quate; Matthew Seibert; Ellen Jorgensen; Christopher E Mason; Elizabeth M Hénaff,EPA Superfund; environmental contamination; metagenomics; bioremediation; antimicrobial resistance; biomining,87,"We investigate the bioremediation potential of the microbiome of the Gowanus Canal, a contaminated waterway in Brooklyn, NY, USA, designated a Superfund site by the US Environmental Protection Agency due to high concentrations of contaminants, including polychlorinated biphenyls, petrochemicals, and heavy metals. We present a metagenomic analysis of the Gowanus Canal sediment, consisting of a longitudinal study of surface sediment and a depth-based study of sediment core samples. We demonstrate that the resident microbiome includes 455 species, including extremophiles across a range of saltwater and freshwater species, which collectively encode 64 metabolic pathways related to organic contaminant degradation and 1171 genes related to heavy metal utilization and detoxification. Furthermore, our genetic screening reveals an environmental reservoir of antimicrobial resistance markers falling within 8 different classes of resistance, as well as The microbiome of the Gowanus Canal is a biotechnological resource of novel metabolic functions that could aid in efforts for bioremediation, AMR reservoir mapping, and heavy metal mitigation.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11999716/
PMC11969330,"
",Bryan G. Schellberg; Abigail N. Koppes; Ryan A. Koppes,N/A,58,"Over the past 30 years, organs-on-a-chip (OOCs) have emerged as a robust alternative to address the technological challenges associated with current",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11969330/
PMC11940681,37-Day microgravity exposure in 16-Week female C57BL/6J mice is associated with bone loss specific to weight-bearing skeletal sites,Rukmani Cahill; Elizabeth A. Blaber; Cassandra M. Juran; Margareth Cheng-Campbell; Joshua S. Alwood; Yasaman Shirazi-Fard; Eduardo A. C. Almeida,N/A,77,"Exposure to weightlessness in microgravity and elevated space radiation are associated with rapid bone loss in mammals, but questions remain about their mechanisms of action and relative importance. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that bone loss during spaceflight in Low Earth Orbit is primarily associated with site-specific microgravity unloading of weight-bearing sites in the skeleton. Microcomputed tomography and histological analyses of bones from mice space flown on ISS for 37 days in the NASA Rodent Research-1 experiment show significant site-specific cancellous and cortical bone loss occurring in the femur, but not in L2 vertebrae. The lack of bone degenerative effects in the spine in combination with same-animal paired losses in the femur suggests that space radiation levels in Low Earth Orbit or other systemic stresses are not likely to significantly contribute to the observed bone loss. Remarkably, spaceflight is also associated with accelerated progression of femoral head endochondral ossification. This suggests the microgravity environment promotes premature progression of secondary ossification during late stages of skeletal maturation at 21 weeks. Furthermore, mice housed in the NASA ISS Rodent Habitat during 1",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11940681/
PMC11941215,Effects of Space Flight on Inflammasome Activation in the Brain of Mice,Upal Roy; Roey Hadad; Angel A. Rodriguez; Alen Saju; Deepa Roy; Mario Gil; Robert W. Keane; Ryan T. Scott; Xiao W. Mao; Juan Pablo de Rivero Vaccari,inflammasome; inflammation; RR-1; space biology; International Space Station; innate immunity; inflammation,99,"Space flight exposes astronauts to stressors that alter the immune response, rendering them vulnerable to infections and diseases. In this study, we aimed to determine the levels of inflammasome activation in the brains of mice that were housed in the International Space Station (ISS) for 37 days. C57BL/6 mice were launched to the ISS as part of NASA’s Rodent Research 1 Mission on SpaceX-4 CRS-4 Dragon cargo spacecraft from 21 September 2014 to 25 October 2014. Dissected mouse brains from that mission were analyzed by immunoblotting of inflammasome signaling proteins and Electrochemiluminescence Immunoassay (ECLIA) for inflammatory cytokine levels. Our data indicate decreased inflammasome activation in the brains of mice that were housed in the ISS for 37 days when compared to the brains of mice that were maintained on the ground, and in mice corresponding to the baseline group that were sacrificed at the time of launching of SpaceX-4. Moreover, we did not detect any significant changes in the expression levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α, IL-2, IFN-γ, IL-5, IL-6, IL-12p70 and IL-10 between the ground control and the flight groups. Together, these studies suggest that spaceflight results in a decrease in the levels of innate immune signaling molecules that govern inflammasome signaling in the brain of mice.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11941215/
PMC11892206,Immunization induces inflammation in the mouse heart during spaceflight,Alicia L. Veliz; Lorelei Hughes; Delia Carrillo; Michael J. Pecaut; Mary Kearns-Jonker,Spaceflight; Microgravity; International space station; Transcriptomics; NF-κB; Immunization; Myocarditis; Inflammation; Heart; Cardiovascular system,95,"Space travel is a growing area of interest and includes initiatives such as NASA’s Moon-to-Mars Mission. Reports on the cardiovascular effects of space travel reveal changes in morphology, metabolism, and function of the cardiovascular system. In this study, the cardiovascular response to immunization in space was studied in mice which were housed and immunized while on the International Space Station (ISS). Mice were immunized with tetanus toxoid combined with the adjuvant CpG (TT + CpG) and the effects of vaccination in space were studied using transcriptomics. Analysis of the mouse heart transcriptome was performed on flight control and flight-immunized mice. The results show that immunization aboard the ISS stimulates heightened inflammation in the heart via induction of the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) signaling pathway to promote the release of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IFNγ, IL-17 and IL-6. Additional transcriptomic changes included alterations in the cytoskeleton and in the expression of transcripts associated with protection from oxidative stress. In summary, inflammation in the heart can occur following immunization in space. This investigation explores the impact of immune challenges on the heart and lays the groundwork for future research into additional cardiac alterations which can occur during spaceflight. The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12864-025-11426-y.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11892206/
PMC11748630,Analyzing the relationship between gene expression and phenotype in space-flown mice using a causal inference machine learning ensemble,James A. Casaletto; Ryan T. Scott; Makenna Myrick; Graham Mackintosh; Hamed Chok; Amanda Saravia-Butler; Adrienne Hoarfrost; Jonathan M. Galazka; Lauren M. Sanders; Sylvain V. Costes,Biotechnology; Computational biology and bioinformatics; Biomarkers; Risk factors,37,"Spaceflight has several detrimental effects on human and rodent health. For example, liver dysfunction is a common phenotype observed in space-flown rodents, and this dysfunction is partially reflected in transcriptomic changes. Studies linking transcriptomics with liver dysfunction rely on tools which exploit correlation, but these tools make no attempt to disambiguate true correlations from spurious ones. In this work, we use a machine learning ensemble of causal inference methods called the Causal Research and Inference Search Platform (CRISP) which was developed to predict causal features of a binary response variable from high-dimensional input. We used CRISP to identify genes robustly correlated with a lipid density phenotype using transcriptomic and histological data from the NASA Open Science Data Repository (OSDR). Our approach identified genes and molecular targets not predicted by previous traditional differential gene expression analyses. These genes are likely to play a pivotal role in the liver dysfunction observed in space-flown rodents, and this work opens the door to identifying novel countermeasures for space travel.",2025,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11748630/
PMC11659408,Sex-specific cardiovascular adaptations to simulated microgravity in Sprague-Dawley rats,Ebrahim Elsangeedy; Dina N. Yamaleyeva; Nicholas P. Edenhoffer; Allyson Deak; Anna Soloshenko; Jonathan Ray; Xuming Sun; Omar H. Shaltout; Nildris Cruz-Diaz; Brian Westwood; Daniel Kim-Shapiro; Debra I. Diz; Shay Soker; Victor M. Pulgar; April Ronca; Jeffrey S. Willey; Liliya M. Yamaleyeva,Physiology; Translational research,97,"Men and women have different cardiovascular responses to spaceflight; however, few studies have focused on direct comparisons between sexes. We investigated the mechanisms of aortic stiffening in socially and sexually mature 20-week-old male and female Sprague Dawley (SD) rats exposed to hindlimb unloading (HLU) for 14 days. Pulse wave velocity (PWV) was greater in the aortic arch of females after HLU versus control females (",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11659408/
PMC11701653,NASA open science data repository: open science for life in space,Samrawit G Gebre; Ryan T Scott; Amanda M Saravia-Butler; Danielle K Lopez; Lauren M Sanders; Sylvain V Costes,N/A,0,"Space biology and health data are critical for the success of deep space missions and sustainable human presence off-world. At the core of effectively managing biomedical risks is the commitment to open science principles, which ensure that data are findable, accessible, interoperable, reusable, reproducible and maximally open. The 2021 integration of the Ames Life Sciences Data Archive with GeneLab to establish the NASA Open Science Data Repository significantly enhanced access to a wide range of life sciences, biomedical-clinical and mission telemetry data alongside existing ‘omics data from GeneLab. This paper describes the new database, its architecture and new data streams supporting diverse data types and enhancing data submission, retrieval and analysis. Features include the biological data management environment for improved data submission, a new user interface, controlled data access, an enhanced API and comprehensive public visualization tools for environmental telemetry, radiation dosimetry data and ‘omics analyses. By fostering global collaboration through its analysis working groups and training programs, the open science data repository promotes widespread engagement in space biology, ensuring transparency and inclusivity in research. It supports the global scientific community in advancing our understanding of spaceflight's impact on biological systems, ensuring humans will thrive in future deep space missions.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11701653/
PMC11593819,Artificial Gravity Attenuates the Transcriptomic Response to Spaceflight in the Optic Nerve and Retina,Isaac Kremsky; Reyna Pergerson; Stephen Justinen; Seta Stanbouly; Jeffrey Willey; Charles A. Fuller; Satoru Takahashi; Martha Hotz Vitaterna; Mary Bouxsein; Xiaowen Mao,spaceflight associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS); optic nerve; retina; RNA-seq; artificial gravity,60,"The development of eye pathology is a serious concern for astronauts who spend time in deep space. Microgravity is a major component of the spaceflight environment which could have adverse effects on ocular health. The use of centrifugation to exert forces that partially or fully mimic Earth-level gravity in space is a possible countermeasure to mitigate the effects of microgravity on the eye. Therefore, we subjected mice on the International Space Station (ISS) to microgravity (0 G) or artificial gravity by centrifugation at 0.33 G, 0.67 G, and 1 G, and then performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on optic nerve and retinal tissue after returning them to Earth alive. We find that the microgravity environment induces transcriptomic changes in the optic nerve and retina consistent with an increased oxidative stress load, inflammation, apoptosis, and lipid metabolic stress. We also find that adding artificial gravity on board the ISS attenuates the transcriptomic response to microgravity in a dose-dependent manner. Such attenuation may effectively protect from and mitigate spaceflight-induced detrimental effects on ocular tissue.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11593819/
PMC11477029,Effect of Simulated Cosmic Radiation on Cytomegalovirus Reactivation and Lytic Replication,Satish K. Mehta; Douglass M. Diak; Sara Bustos-Lopez; Mayra Nelman-Gonzalez; Xi Chen; Ianik Plante; Stephen J. Stray; Ritesh Tandon; Brian E. Crucian,cytomegalovirus; radiation; galactic cosmic radiation; spaceflight; herpes viral reactivation,23,"Human exploration of the solar system will expose crew members to galactic cosmic radiation (GCR), with a potential for adverse health effects. GCR particles (protons and ions) move at nearly the speed of light and easily penetrate space station walls, as well as the human body. Previously, we have shown reactivation of latent herpesviruses, including herpes simplex virus, Varicella zoster virus, Epstein–Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus (CMV), during stays at the International Space Station. Given the prevalence of latent CMV and the known propensity of space radiation to cause alterations in many cellular processes, we undertook this study to understand the role of GCR in reactivating latent CMV. Latently infected Kasumi cells with CMV were irradiated with",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11477029/
PMC11487192,Protein kinase 2 of the giant sarcomeric protein UNC-89 regulates mitochondrial morphology and function,Yohei Matsunaga; Hiroshi Qadota; Nasab Ghazal; Leila Lesanpezeshki; Till Dorendorf; Jasmine C. Moody; Arnaud Ahier; Courtney J. Matheny; Siva A. Vanapalli; Steven Zuryn; Olga Mayans; Jennifer Q. Kwong; Guy M. Benian,Cytoskeleton; Cell signalling; Mitochondria,81,"UNC-89 is a giant sarcomeric M-line protein required for sarcomere organization and optimal muscle function. UNC-89 contains two protein kinase domains, PK1 and PK2, separated by an elastic region. Here we show that PK2 is a canonical kinase expected to be catalytically active.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11487192/
PMC11484870,Author Correction: To boldly go where no microRNAs have gone before: spaceflight impact on risk for small-for-gestational-age infants,Giada Corti; JangKeun Kim; Francisco J. Enguita; Joseph W. Guarnieri; Lawrence I. Grossman; Sylvain V. Costes; Matias Fuentealba; Ryan T. Scott; Andrea Magrini; Lauren M. Sanders; Kanhaiya Singh; Chandan K. Sen; Cassandra M. Juran; Amber M. Paul; David Furman; Jean Calleja-Agius; Christopher E. Mason; Diego Galeano; Massimo Bottini; Afshin Beheshti,Systems biology; Systems analysis; Reproductive disorders,0,N/A,2024,correction,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11484870/
PMC11451251,Adaptation to space conditions of novel bacterial species isolated from the International Space Station revealed by functional gene annotations and comparative genome analysis,Lukasz M. Szydlowski; Alper A. Bulbul; Anna C. Simpson; Deniz E. Kaya; Nitin K. Singh; Ugur O. Sezerman; Paweł P. Łabaj; Tomasz Kosciolek; Kasthuri Venkateswaran,Functional annotation; International space station; Extremophiles,81,"The extreme environment of the International Space Station (ISS) puts selective pressure on microorganisms unintentionally introduced during its 20+ years of service as a low-orbit science platform and human habitat. Such pressure leads to the development of new features not found in the Earth-bound relatives, which enable them to adapt to unfavorable conditions. In this study, we generated the functional annotation of the genomes of five newly identified species of Gram-positive bacteria, four of which are non-spore-forming and one spore-forming, all isolated from the ISS. Using a deep-learning based tool—deepFRI—we were able to functionally annotate close to 100% of protein-coding genes in all studied species, overcoming other annotation tools. Our comparative genomic analysis highlights common characteristics across all five species and specific genetic traits that appear unique to these ISS microorganisms. Proteome analysis mirrored these genomic patterns, revealing similar traits. The collective annotations suggest adaptations to life in space, including the management of hypoosmotic stress related to microgravity via mechanosensitive channel proteins, increased DNA repair activity to counteract heightened radiation exposure, and the presence of mobile genetic elements enhancing metabolism. In addition, our findings suggest the evolution of certain genetic traits indicative of potential pathogenic capabilities, such as small molecule and peptide synthesis and ATP-dependent transporters. These traits, exclusive to the ISS microorganisms, further substantiate previous reports explaining why microbes exposed to space conditions demonstrate enhanced antibiotic resistance and pathogenicity. Our findings indicate that the microorganisms isolated from ISS we studied have adapted to life in space. Evidence such as mechanosensitive channel proteins, increased DNA repair activity, as well as metallopeptidases and novel S-layer oxidoreductases suggest a convergent adaptation among these diverse microorganisms, potentially complementing one another within the context of the microbiome. The common genes that facilitate adaptation to the ISS environment may enable bioproduction of essential biomolecules need during future space missions, or serve as potential drug targets, if these microorganisms pose health risks. Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-024-01916-8.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11451251/
PMC11403809,Celebrating 30 years of access to NASA Space Life Sciences data,Lauren M Sanders; Danielle K Lopez; Alan E Wood; Ryan T Scott; Samrawit G Gebre; Amanda M Saravia-Butler; Sylvain V Costes,space biology; NASA; data; open science; data archive; FAIR; omics,0,"NASA’s space life sciences research programs established a decades-long legacy of enhancing our ability to safely explore the cosmos. From Skylab and the Space Shuttle Program to the NASA Balloon Program and the International Space Station National Lab, these programs generated priceless data that continue to paint a vibrant picture of life in space. These data are available to the scientific community in various data repositories, including the NASA Ames Life Sciences Data Archive (ALSDA) and NASA GeneLab. Here we recognize the 30-year anniversary of data access through ALSDA and the 10-year anniversary of GeneLab.",2024,article-commentary,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11403809/
PMC11386075,Predicting how varying moisture conditions impact the microbiome of dust collected from the International Space Station,Nicholas Nastasi; Ashleigh Bope; Marit E. Meyer; John M. Horack; Karen C. Dannemiller,Built environment; Fungi; Spacecraft; Relative humidity; Microbiome; Space biology; Moisture; Mold,61,"The commercialization of space travel will soon lead to many more people living and working in unique built environments similar to the International Space Station, which is a specialized closed environment that contains its own indoor microbiome. Unintended microbial growth can occur in these environments as in buildings on Earth from elevated moisture, such as from a temporary ventilation system failure. This growth can drive negative health outcomes and degrade building materials. We need a predictive approach for modeling microbial growth in these critical indoor spaces. Here, we demonstrate that even short exposures to varying elevated relative humidity can facilitate rapid microbial growth and microbial community composition changes in dust from spacecraft. We modeled fungal growth in dust from the International Space Station using the time-of-wetness framework with activation and deactivation limited growth occurring at 85% and 100% relative humidity, respectively. Fungal concentrations ranged from an average of 4.4 × 10 Our results demonstrate that moisture conditions can be used to develop and predict changes in fungal growth and composition onboard human-occupied spacecraft. This predictive model can be expanded upon to include other spacecraft environmental factors such as microgravity, elevated carbon dioxide conditions, and radiation exposure. Understanding microbial growth in spacecraft can help better protect astronaut health, fortify spacecraft integrity, and promote planetary protection as human activity increases in low-Earth orbit, the moon, Mars, and beyond. Video Abstract The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-024-01864-3.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11386075/
PMC11362537,Spaceflight alters host-gut microbiota interactions,E. Gonzalez; M. D. Lee; B. T. Tierney; N. Lipieta; P. Flores; M. Mishra; L. Beckett; A. Finkelstein; A. Mo; P. Walton; F. Karouia; R. Barker; R. J. Jansen; S. J. Green; S. Weging; J. Kelliher; N. K. Singh; D. Bezdan; J. Galazska; N. J. B. Brereton,Microbial communities; Microbial genetics; Metagenomics; Microbiota,185,"The ISS rodent habitat has provided crucial insights into the impact of spaceflight on mammals, inducing symptoms characteristic of liver disease, insulin resistance, osteopenia, and myopathy. Although these physiological responses can involve the microbiome on Earth, host-microbiota interactions during spaceflight are still being elucidated. We explore murine gut microbiota and host gene expression in the colon and liver after 29 and 56 days of spaceflight using multiomics. Metagenomics revealed significant changes in 44 microbiome species, including relative reductions in bile acid and butyrate metabolising bacteria like",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11362537/
PMC11339457,Discoveries from human stem cell research in space that are relevant to advancing cellular therapies on Earth,Fay Ghani; Abba C. Zubair,Stem cells; Stem-cell research; Stem cells,74,"Stem cell research performed in space has provided fundamental insights into stem cell properties and behavior in microgravity including cell proliferation, differentiation, and regeneration capabilities. However, there is broader scientific value to this research including potential translation of stem cell research in space to clinical applications. Here, we present important discoveries from different studies performed in space demonstrating the potential use of human stem cells as well as the limitations in cellular therapeutics. A full understanding of the effects of microgravity in space on potentially supporting the expansion and/or enhancement of stem cell function is required to translate the findings into clinics.",2024,review-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11339457/
PMC11324864,Simulated microgravity impairs human NK cell cytotoxic activity against space radiation-relevant leukemic cells,Bradford M. Kuhlman; Jonathan H. Diaz; Trang Simon; Kimberly D. Reeves; Stephen J. Walker; Anthony Atala; Graça Almeida-Porada; Christopher D. Porada,Tumour immunology; Haematological cancer,67,"Natural killer (NK) cells are an important first-line of defense against malignant cells. Because of the potential for increased cancer risk from astronaut exposure to space radiation, we determined whether microgravity present during spaceflight affects the body’s defenses against leukemogenesis. Human NK cells were cultured for 48 h under normal gravity and simulated microgravity (sμG), and cytotoxicity against K-562 (CML) and MOLT-4 (T-ALL) cells was measured using standard methodology or under continuous sμG. This brief exposure to sμG markedly reduced NK cytotoxicity against both leukemias, and these deleterious effects were more pronounced in continuous sμG. RNA-seq performed on NK cells from two additional healthy donors provided insight into the mechanism(s) by which sμG reduced cytotoxicity. Given our prior report of space radiation-induced human T-ALL in vivo, the reduced cytotoxicity against MOLT-4 is striking and raises the possibility that μG may increase astronaut risk of leukemogenesis during prolonged missions beyond LEO.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11324864/
PMC11353732,Simulated Microgravity Alters Gene Regulation Linked to Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease,Candice G. T. Tahimic; Sonette Steczina; Aimy Sebastian; Nicholas R. Hum; Metadel Abegaz; Masahiro Terada; Maria Cimini; David A. Goukassian; Ann-Sofie Schreurs; Tana M. Hoban-Higgins; Charles A. Fuller; Gabriela G. Loots; Ruth K. Globus; Yasaman Shirazi-Fard,hindlimb unloading; microgravity; cardiovascular system; immune response; transcriptomics,64,"Microgravity exposure induces a cephalad fluid shift and an overall reduction in physical activity levels which can lead to cardiovascular deconditioning in the absence of countermeasures. Future spaceflight missions will expose crew to extended periods of microgravity among other stressors, the effects of which on cardiovascular health are not fully known. In this study, we determined cardiac responses to extended microgravity exposure using the rat hindlimb unloading (HU) model. We hypothesized that exposure to prolonged simulated microgravity and subsequent recovery would lead to increased oxidative damage and altered expression of genes involved in the oxidative response. To test this hypothesis, we examined hearts of male (three and nine months of age) and female (3 months of age) Long–Evans rats that underwent HU for various durations up to 90 days and reambulated up to 90 days post-HU. Results indicate sex-dependent changes in oxidative damage marker 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and antioxidant gene expression in left ventricular tissue. Three-month-old females displayed elevated 8-OHdG levels after 14 days of HU while age-matched males did not. In nine-month-old males, there were no differences in 8-OHdG levels between HU and normally loaded control males at any of the timepoints tested following HU. RNAseq analysis of left ventricular tissue from nine-month-old males after 14 days of HU revealed upregulation of pathways involved in pro-inflammatory signaling, immune cell activation and differential expression of genes associated with cardiovascular disease progression. Taken together, these findings provide a rationale for targeting antioxidant and immune pathways and that sex differences should be taken into account in the development of countermeasures to maintain cardiovascular health in space.",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11353732/
PMC11271499,Spaceflight increases sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca,Jessica L. Braun; Val A. Fajardo,Calcium channels; Physiology,83,"Spending time in a microgravity environment is known to cause significant skeletal muscle atrophy and weakness via muscle unloading, which can be partly attributed to Ca",2024,research-article,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11271499/
